# source: Fathers/English/ANF/Volume V.   The Fathers of the Third Century
# series: ANF
# volume: Volume V.
# father: cyprian
# work: Treatises of Questionable Authority
# latin_match_candidate: (none)
# extracted: 2026-09-01
# note: Public-domain Schaff English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
Treatises Attributed to Cyprian on Questionable Authority
   /ccel/schaff/anf05.iv.vii.html
     __________________________________________________________________

  Treatises Attributed to Cyprian on Questionable Authority
     __________________________________________________________________

   Translator's Introduction

   to

   Treatises Attributed to Cyprian on Questionable Authority.

   ------------------------

   The treatises which follow are usually classed under the doubtful works
   of Cyprian.  Baluzius, however, gives the two first, On the Public
   Shows, and On the Glory of Martyrdom, among the genuine Opuscula, and
   says: "I have not thought it fit to prejudice any one amid the
   diversity of opinions on the subject, but have refrained from
   separating the following from the genuine works of the blessed martyr,
   especially since many have observed that there is no such difference of
   style in these writings as to justify the denial of their authorship to
   Cyprian."

   Of course the question is one almost entirely of criticism, and the
   translator leaves the discussion of it to abler hands. He ventures,
   however, to record his impression, that the style of the following
   writings throughout is more pretentious and laboured, and far more
   wordy and involved, than that of Cyprian's undoubted works. With a more
   copious vocabulary, there is manifested less skill in the use of words;
   and if the text be not in some places most elaborately and
   unintelligibly corrupt, the accumulation of epithets, as well as their
   collocation, seems the very wantonness of rhetoric. The text, however,
   is undoubtedly far less to be depended upon than in the case of the
   genuine works.

   The treatises On the Discipline and Benefit of Chastity and the
   Exhortation to Repentance are generally placed under the Opuscula
   dubia. The former was first edited by Baluzius, with the title "Epistle
   of an Unknown Author." Its Cyprianic authorship was maintained by
   Bellarmin, Pamelius, and others; while Erasmus, Tillemont, and others
   have rejected it as spurious. The second treatise was first published
   by Joannes Chrysostomus Trombellius (in 1751), who regarded it as a
   genuine work of Cyprian's. And indeed, as far as internal evidence
   goes, the treatise, consisting merely of a collection of quotations
   from Scripture, in the manner of the Testimonies against the Jews, may
   probably be attributed to him with as much reason as the Testimonies.

   It is, however, right to add, that Professor Blunt quotes from the
   Treatise on the Glory of Martyrdom as being Cyprian's, without
   referring to any doubts on the subject. [4815]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4815] [A strong testimony in its favour. It is quite possible that the
   less worthy portions are corrupt interpolations.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Treatises Attributed to Cyprian on Questionable Authority.

   ------------------------

   On the Public Shows. [4816]

   Argument. [4817] --The Writer First of All Treats Against Those Who
   Endeavoured to Defend the Public Exhibitions of the Heathens by
   Scriptural Authority; And He Proves That, Although They are Never
   Prohibited by the Express Words of Scripture, Yet that They are
   Condemned in the Scriptural Prohibition of Idolatry, from the Fact that
   There is No Kind of Public Show Which is Not Consecrated to Idols.
   [4818]

   1. Cyprian to the congregation who stand fast in the Gospel, sends
   greeting. As it greatly saddens me, and deeply afflicts my soul, when
   no opportunity of writing to you is presented to me, for it is my loss
   not to hold converse with you; so nothing restores to me such
   joyfulness and hilarity, as when that opportunity is once more afforded
   me. I think that I am with you when I am speaking to you by letter.
   Although, therefore, I know that you are satisfied that what I tell you
   is even as I say, and that you have no doubt of the truth of my words,
   nevertheless an actual proof will also attest the reality of the
   matter. For my affection (for you) is proved, when absolutely no
   opportunity (of writing) is passed over. However certain I may be,
   then, that you are no less respectable in the conduct of your life than
   faithful in respect of your sacramental vow; [4819] still, since there
   are not wanting smooth-tongued advocates of vice, and indulgent patrons
   who afford authority to vices, and, what is worse, convert the rebuke
   of the heavenly Scriptures into an advocacy of crimes; as if the
   pleasure derived from the public exhibitions might be sought after as
   being innocent, by way of a mental relaxation;--for thereby the vigour
   of ecclesiastical discipline is so relaxed, and is so deteriorated by
   all the languor of vice that it is no longer apology, but authority,
   that is given for wickedness,--it seemed good in a few words not now to
   instruct you, but to admonish you who are instructed, lest, because the
   wounds are badly bound up, they should break through the cicatrix of
   their closed soundness. For no mischief is put an end to with so much
   difficulty but that its recurrence is easy, so long as it is both
   maintained by the consent, and caressed by the excuses [4820] of the
   multitude.

   2. Believers, and men who claim for themselves the authority of the
   Christian name, are not ashamed--are not, I repeat, ashamed to find a
   defence in the heavenly Scriptures for the vain superstitions
   associated with the public exhibitions of the heathens, and thus to
   attribute divine authority to idolatry. For how is it, that what is
   done by the heathens in honour of any idol is resorted to in a public
   show by faithful Christians, and the heathen idolatry is maintained,
   and the true and divine religion is trampled upon in contempt of God?
   Shame binds me to relate their pretexts and defences in this behalf.
   "Where," say they, "are there such Scriptures? where are these things
   prohibited? On the contrary, both Elias is the charioteer of Israel,
   and David himself danced before the ark. We read of psalteries, horns,
   [4821] trumpets, drums, pipes, harps, and choral dances. Moreover, the
   apostle, in his struggle, puts before us the contest of the Cæstus, and
   of our wrestle against the spiritual things of wickedness. Again, when
   he borrows his illustrations from the racecourse, he also proposes the
   prize of the crown. Why, then, may not a faithful Christian man gaze
   upon that which the divine pen might write about?" At this point I
   might not unreasonably say that it would have been far better for them
   not to know any writings at all, than thus to read the Scriptures.
   [4822] For words and illustrations which are recorded by way of
   exhortation to evangelical virtue, are translated by them into pleas
   for vice; because those things are written of, not that they should be
   gazed upon, but that a greater eagerness might be aroused in our minds
   in respect of things that will benefit us, seeing that among the
   heathens there is manifest so much eagerness in respect of things which
   will be of no advantage.

   3. These are therefore an argument to stimulate virtue, not a
   permission or a liberty to look upon heathen error, that by this
   consideration the mind may be more inflamed to Gospel virtue for the
   sake of the divine rewards, since through the suffering of all these
   labours and pains it is granted to attain to eternal benefits. For that
   Elias is the charioteer of Israel is no defence for gazing upon the
   public games; for he ran his race in no circus. And that David in the
   presence of God led the dances, is no sanction for faithful Christians
   to occupy seats in the public theatre; for David did not twist his
   limbs about in obscene movements, to represent in his dancing the story
   of Grecian lust.  Psalteries, horns, pipes, drums, harps, were used in
   the service of the Lord, and not of idols. Let it not on this account
   be objected that unlawful things may be gazed upon; for by the artifice
   of the devil these are changed from things holy to things unlawful.
   Then let shame demur to these things, even if the Holy Scriptures
   cannot. For there are certain things wherein the Scripture is more
   careful in giving instruction. Acquiescing in the claim of modesty, it
   has forbidden more where it has been silent. The truth, if it descended
   low enough to deal with such things, would think very badly of its
   faithful votaries. For very often, in matters of precept, some things
   are advantageously said nothing about; they often remind when they are
   expressly forbidden. So also there is an implied silence even in the
   writings of the Scripture; and severity speaks in the place of
   precepts; and reason teaches where Scripture has held its peace. Let
   every man only take counsel with himself, and let him speak
   consistently with the character of his profession, [4823] and then he
   will never do any of these things. [4824] For that conscience will have
   more weight which shall be indebted to none other than itself.

   4. What has Scripture interdicted?  Certainly it has forbidden gazing
   upon what it forbids to be done. It condemned, I say, all those kinds
   of exhibitions when it abrogated idolatry--the mother of all public
   amusements, [4825] whence these prodigies of vanity and lightness came.
   For what public exhibition is without an idol? what amusement without a
   sacrifice? what contest is not consecrated to some dead person? And
   what does a faithful Christian do in the midst of such things as these?
   If he avoids idolatry, why does he [4826] who is now sacred take
   pleasure in things which are worthy of reproach? Why does he approve of
   superstitions which are opposed to God, and which he loves while he
   gazes upon them? Besides, let him be aware that all these things are
   the inventions of demons, not of God. He is shameless who in the church
   exorcises demons while he praises their delights in public shows; and
   although, once for all renouncing him, he has put away everything in
   baptism, when he goes to the devil's exhibition after (receiving)
   Christ, he renounces Christ as much as (he had done) the devil.
   Idolatry, as I have already said, is the mother of all the public
   amusements; and this, in order that faithful Christians may come under
   its influence, entices them by the delight of the eyes and the ears.
   Romulus was the first who consecrated the games of the circus to Consus
   as the god of counsel, in reference to the rape of the Sabine women.
   But the rest of the scenic amusements were provided to distract the
   attention of the people while famine invaded the city, and were
   subsequently dedicated to Ceres and Bacchus, and to the rest of the
   idols and dead men. Those Grecian contests, whether in poems, or in
   instrumental music, or in words, or in personal prowess, have as their
   guardians various demons; and whatever else there is which either
   attracts the eyes or allures the ears of the spectators, if it be
   investigated in reference to its origin and institution, presents as
   its reason either an idol, or a demon, or a dead man.  Thus the devil,
   who is their original contriver, because he knew that naked idolatry
   would by itself excite repugnance, associated it with public
   exhibitions, that for the sake of their attraction it might be loved.

   5. What is the need of prosecuting the subject further, or of
   describing the unnatural kinds of sacrifices in the public shows, among
   which sometimes even a man becomes the victim by the fraud of the
   priest, when the gore, yet hot from the throat, is received in the
   foaming cup while it still steams, and, as if it were thrown into the
   face of the thirsting idol, is brutally drunk in pledge to it; and in
   the midst of the pleasures of the spectators the death of some is
   eagerly besought, so that by means of a bloody exhibition men may learn
   fierceness, as if a man's own private frenzy were of little account to
   him unless he should learn it also in public?  For the punishment of a
   man, a rabid wild beast is nourished with delicacies, that he may
   become the more cruelly ferocious under the eyes of the spectators. The
   skilful trainer instructs the brute, which perhaps might have been more
   merciful had not its more brutal master taught it cruelty. Then, to say
   nothing of whatever idolatry more generally recommends, how idle are
   the contests themselves; strifes in colours, contentions in races,
   acclamations in mere questions of honour; rejoicing because a horse has
   been more fleet, grieving because it was more sluggish, reckoning up
   the years of cattle, knowing the consuls under whom they ran, learning
   their age, tracing their breed, recording their very grandsires and
   great-grand-sires! How unprofitable a matter is all this; nay, how
   disgraceful and ignominious! This very man, I say, who can compute by
   memory the whole family of his equine race, and can relate it with
   great quickness without interfering with the exhibition--were you to
   inquire of this man who were the parents of Christ, he cannot tell, or
   he is the more unfortunate if he can. But if, again, I should ask him
   by what road he has come to that exhibition, he will confess (that he
   has come) by the naked bodies of prostitutes and of profligate women,
   by (scenes of) public lust, by public disgrace, by vulgar
   lasciviousness, by the common contempt of all men. And, not to object
   to him what perchance he has done, still he has seen what was not fit
   to be done, and he has trained his eyes to the exhibition of idolatry
   by lust: he would have dared, had he been able, to take that which is
   holy into the brothel with him; since, as he hastens to the spectacle
   when dismissed from the Lord's table, and still bearing within him, as
   often occurs, the Eucharist, that unfaithful man has carried about the
   holy body of Christ among the filthy bodies of harlots, and has
   deserved a deeper condemnation for the way by which he has gone
   thither, than for the pleasure he has received from the exhibition.

   6. But now to pass from this to the shameless corruption of the stage.
   I am ashamed to tell what things are said; I am even ashamed to
   denounce the things that are done--the tricks of arguments, the
   cheatings of adulterers, the immodesties of women, the scurrile jokes,
   the sordid parasites, even the toga'd fathers of families themselves,
   sometimes stupid, sometimes obscene, but in all cases dull, in all
   cases immodest.  And though no individual, or family, or profession, is
   spared by the discourse [4827] of these reprobates, yet every one
   flocks to the play. The general infamy is delightful to see or to
   recognise; it is a pleasure, nay, even to learn it. People flock
   thither to the public disgrace of the brothel for the teaching of
   obscenity, that nothing less may be done in secret than what is learnt
   in public; and in the midst of the laws themselves is taught everything
   that the laws forbid. What does a faithful Christian do among these
   things, since he may not even think upon wickedness? Why does he find
   pleasure in the representations of lust, so as among them to lay aside
   his modesty and become more daring in crimes? He is learning to do,
   while he is becoming accustomed to see. Nevertheless, those women whom
   their misfortune has introduced and degraded to this slavery, conceal
   their public wantonness, and find consolation for their disgrace in
   their concealment. Even they who have sold their modesty blush to
   appear to have done so. But that public prodigy is transacted in the
   sight of all, and the obscenity of prostitutes is surpassed.  A method
   is sought to commit adultery with the eyes. To this infamy an infamy
   fully worthy of it is super added: a human being broken down in every
   limb, a man melted to something beneath the effeminacy of a woman, has
   found the art to supply language with his hands; and on behalf of
   one--I know not what, but neither man nor woman--the whole city is in a
   state of commotion, that the fabulous debaucheries of antiquity may be
   represented in a ballet. Whatever is not lawful is so beloved, that
   what had even been lost sight of by the lapse of time is brought back
   again into the recollection of the eyes.

   7. It is not sufficient for lust to make use of its present means of
   mischief, unless by the exhibition it makes its own that in which a
   former age had also gone wrong. It is not lawful, I say, for faithful
   Christians to be present; it is not lawful, I say, at all, even for
   those whom for the delight of their ears Greece sends everywhere to all
   who are instructed in her vain arts. [4828] One imitates the hoarse
   warlike clangours of the trumpet; another with his breath blowing into
   a pipe regulates its mournful sounds; another with dances, and with the
   musical voice of a man, strives with his breath, which by an effort he
   had drawn from his bowels into the upper parts of his body, to play
   upon the stops of pipes; now letting forth the sound, and now closing
   it up inside, and forcing it into the air by certain openings of the
   stops; now breaking the sound in measure, he endeavours to speak with
   his fingers, ungrateful to the Artificer who gave him a tongue. Why
   should I speak of comic and useless efforts?  Why of those great tragic
   vocal ravings? Why of strings set vibrating with noise? These things,
   even if they were not dedicated to idols, [4829] ought not to be
   approached and gazed upon by faithful Christians; because, even if they
   were not criminal, they are characterized by a worthlessness which is
   extreme, and which is little suited to believers.

   8. Now that other folly of others is an obvious source of advantage to
   idle men; and the first victory is for the belly to be able to crave
   food beyond the human limit,--a flagitious traffic for the claim to the
   crown of gluttony: the wretched face is hired out to bear wounding
   blows, that the more wretched belly may be gorged. How disgusting,
   besides, are those struggles! Man lying below man is enfolded in
   abominable embraces and twinings. In such a contest, whether a man
   looks on or conquers, still his modesty is conquered. Behold, one naked
   man bounds forth towards you; another with straining powers tosses a
   brazen ball into the air. This is not glory, but folly. In fine, take
   away the spectator, and you will have shown its emptiness.  Such things
   as these should be avoided by faithful Christians, as I have frequently
   said already; spectacles so vain, so mischievous, so sacrilegious, from
   which both our eyes and our ears should be guarded. We quickly get
   accustomed to what we hear and what we see. For since man's mind is
   itself drawn towards vice, what will it do if it should have
   inducements of a bodily nature as well as a downward tendency in its
   slippery will? What will it do if it should be impelled from without?
   [4830] Therefore the mind must be called away from such things as
   these.

   9. The Christian has nobler exhibitions, if he wishes for them. He has
   true and profitable pleasures, if he will recollect himself. And to say
   nothing of those which he cannot yet contemplate, he has that beauty of
   the world to look upon and admire. [4831] He may gaze upon the sun's
   rising, and again on its setting, as it brings round in their mutual
   changes days and nights; the moon's orb, designating in its waxings and
   warnings the courses of the seasons; the troops of shining stars, and
   those which glitter from on high with extreme mobility,--their members
   divided through the changes of the entire year, and the days themselves
   with the nights distributed into hourly periods; the heavy mass of the
   earth balanced by the mountains, and the flowing rivers with their
   sources; the expanse of seas, with their waves and shores; and
   meanwhile, the air, subsisting equally everywhere in perfect harmony,
   expanded in the midst of all, and in concordant bonds animating all
   things with its delicate life, now scattering showers from the
   contracted clouds, now recalling the serenity of the sky with its
   refreshed purity; and in all these spheres their appropriate
   tenants--in the air the birds, in the waters the fishes, on the earth
   man. Let these, I say, and other divine works, be the exhibitions for
   faithful Christians. What theatre built by human hands could ever be
   compared to such works as these? Although it may be reared with immense
   piles of stones, the mountain crests are loftier; and although the
   fretted roofs glitter with gold, they will be surpassed by the
   brightness of the starry firmament. [4832] Never will any one admire
   the works of man, if he has recognised himself as the son of God. He
   degrades himself from the height of his nobility, who can admire
   anything but the Lord.

   10. Let the faithful Christian, I say, devote himself to the sacred
   Scriptures, [4833] and there he shall find worthy exhibitions for his
   faith. He will see God establishing His world, and making not only the
   other animals, but that marvellous and better fabric of man. He will
   gaze upon the world in its delightfulness, righteous shipwrecks, the
   rewards of the good, and the punishments of the impious, seas drained
   dry by a people, and again from the rock seas spread out by a people.
   He will behold harvests descending from heaven, not pressed in by the
   plough; rivers with their hosts of waters bridled in, exhibiting dry
   crossings.  He will behold in some cases faith struggling with the
   flame, wild beasts overcome by devotion and soothed into gentleness. He
   will look also upon souls brought back even from death. Moreover, he
   will consider the marvellous souls brought back to the life of bodies
   which themselves were already consumed. And in all these things he will
   see a still greater exhibition--that devil who had triumphed over the
   whole world lying prostrate under the feet of Christ. How honourable is
   this exhibition, brethren! how delightful, how needful ever to gaze
   upon one's hope, and to open our eyes to one's salvation! This is a
   spectacle which is beheld even when sight is lost. This is an
   exhibition which is given by neither prætor nor consul, but by Him who
   is alone and above all things, and before all things, yea, and of whom
   are all things, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
   and honour for ever and ever. I bid you, brethren, ever heartily
   farewell. Amen. [4834]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4816] [See Ben Jonson, Volpone, Ep. Dedicatory.]

   [4817] Obviously imitating Tertullian's treatise De Spectaculis. [See
   vol. iii. p. 79.]

   [4818] He then prosecutes the subject, by going through the several
   kinds of public exhibitions, and sets forth, a little more diffusely
   than in the Epistle to Donatus, what risks are incurred by the
   spectators, and especially in respect of those exhibitions wherein, as
   he says, "representations of lust convey instruction in obscenity."
   Finally, he briefly enumerates such exhibitions as are worthy of the
   interest of a Christian man, and in which he ought rightfully to find
   pleasure. [For Epistle to Donatus, see p. 275, supra.]

   [4819] "In sacramento."

   [4820] Elucidation I.

   [4821] "Nabla."

   [4822] [In Edin. trans. needlessly "the writings of the Scriptures."]

   [4823] "Cum persona professionis suæ loquatur."

   [4824] Baluzius reads with less probability "indecorum," "anything
   unbecoming." The reading adopted in the text is, according to Fell,
   "inde eorum."

   [4825] Vid. Ovid's Fasti, lib. v.

   [4826] The Oxford text here has the reading, "Why does he speak of it?
   why does he," etc.

   [4827] [It is painful to recognise, in the general licence of the press
   in our country, this very feature of a corrupt civilization,--a delight
   in scandal, and in the invasion of homes and private affairs, for the
   gratification of the popular appetite.]

   [4828] [Compare Clement, vol. ii. p. 248, note 5, and p. 249, notes 2,
   11.]

   [4829] [This touches a point important to the modern question.  It is
   said, "Oh! but these Fathers denounced only those heathen spectacles of
   which idolatry was part," etc. The reply is sufficiently made by our
   author.]

   [4830] There is much confusion in the reading of this passage, which in
   the original runs, according to Baluzius: "Nam cum mens hominis ad
   vitia ipsa ducatur, quid faciet, si habuerit exempla naturæ corporis
   lubrica quæ sparta corruit? Quid faciet si fuerit impulsa?"

   [4831] [Compare Clement, vol. ii. p. 256, and note 1.]

   [4832] [De Maistre, who is a Christian, with all his hereditary
   prejudice and enslavement, has a fine passage in the opening of his
   Soirées de St. Pétersbourg, which the reader will enjoy. It concludes
   with this saying:  "Les coeurs pervers n'ont jamais de belles nuits ni
   de beaux jours." P. 7. vol. i. See vol. iv. p. 173, this series.]

   [4833] [Always the sacred Scriptures are held up as capable of yielding
   delight as well as profit to the believer. The works of God and His
   word go together. Col. iii. 16.]

   [4834] [There is much in the above treatise which is not unworthy of
   Cyprian. As to questions of authenticity, however, experts alone should
   venture upon an opinion. Non nobis tantas componere lites.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   On the Glory of Martyrdom. [4835]

   ------------------------

   Argument.--The Glory of Martyrdom,--Namely, What Martyrdom Is, How
   Great It Is, and of What Advantage It is. By Similitudes, and by
   Argument Deduced from the Daily Deaths, the Author Exhorts to a Joyous
   Submission to Death for Christ's Sake. [4836] Among the Benefits of
   Martyrdom He Maintains that Without Experience of the Universal
   Suffering that Prevails, the Propitiation of Christ Crowns Martyrs in
   Such a Way that His Saying About the Very Last Farthing is Not
   Applicable to Them.

   1. Although, beloved brethren, it is unfitting, while my speaking to
   you receives this indulgence, to profess any trepidation, and it very
   little becomes me to diminish the glory of so great a devotion by the
   confession of an incipient doubt; yet at the same time I say that my
   mind is divided by that very deliberation, being influenced by the
   desire of describing the glory, and restrained from speaking by the
   magnitude of the virtue (to be described); since it is either not
   becoming to be silent, or it is perilous to say too little, save that
   to one who is tossing in doubt this consideration alone is helpful,
   that it would appear easy for him to be pardoned who has not feared to
   dare. Wherefore, beloved brethren, although my mental capacity is
   burdened by the importance of the subject in such a way, that in
   proportion as it puts itself forth in declaring the dignity of
   martyrdom, in that degree it is overwhelmed by the very weight of the
   glory, and by its estimation of all those things concerning which, when
   it speaks most, it fails, by its address being weakened, and broken,
   and self-entangled, and does not with free and loosened reins display
   the might of such glory in the liberal eloquence of discourse; yet, if
   I am not mistaken, some power there will be in my utterance, which,
   when fortified by the appeal of the work itself, may here and there
   pour forth what the unequal consciousness of my ability withheld from
   my words. Since, therefore, beloved brethren, involved as we are in
   affairs so many and important, we are endeavouring with all eagerness
   and labour to confirm the excellent and most beautiful issues of
   salvation, I do not fear being so deterred by any slothful dread as to
   be withheld or rendered powerless; since, if any one should desire to
   look into that of which we are considering, the hope of devotion being
   taken into account, and the very magnitude of the thing being weighed,
   he would rather wonder that I could have dared at all, in a matter
   wherein both the vastness of the subject oppressed me, and the
   earnestness of its own desire drove my mind, confused with its joy,
   into mental difficulties. For who is there whom such a subject would
   not alarm? who is there whom it would not overthrow with the fear of
   its own wonder!

   2. For there is indeed, unless I am mistaken, even in the very power of
   conscience, a marvellous fear which at once disturbs and inflames us;
   whose power, the more closely you look into, the more the dreadful
   sense of its obligation is gathered from its very aspect of venerable
   majesty. For assuredly you ought to consider what glory there is in
   expiating any kind of defilement of life, and the foulness of a
   polluted body, and the contagions gathered from the long putrefaction
   of vices, and the worldly guilt incurred by so great a lapse of time,
   by the remedial agency of one stroke, whereby both reward may be
   increased, and guilt may be excluded. Whence every perfection and
   condition of life is included in martyrdom. This is the foundation of
   life and faith, this is the safeguard of salvation, this is the bond of
   liberty and honour; and although there are also other means whereby the
   light may be attained, yet we more easily arrive at nearness to the
   promised reward, by help of these punishments, which sustain us.

   3. For consider what glory it is to set aside the lusts of this life,
   and to oppose a mind withdrawn from all commerce with nature and the
   world, to all the opposition of the adversary, and to have no dread of
   the cruelty of the torturer; that a man should be animated by the
   suffering whereby he might be believed to be destroyed, and should take
   to himself, as an enhancement of his strength, that which the punisher
   thinks will aggravate his torments. For although the hook, springing
   forth from the stiffening ribs, is put back again into the wound, and
   with the repeated strokes of the whip the returning lash [4837] is
   drawn away with the rent portions of the flesh; still he stands
   immoveable, the stronger for his sufferings, revolving only this in his
   mind, that in that brutality of the executioners Christ Himself is
   suffering [4838] more in proportion to what he suffers. For since, if
   he should deny the Lord, he would incur guilt on His behalf for whom he
   ought to have overcome, it is essential that He should be seen to bear
   all things to whom the victory is due, even in the suffering.

   4. Therefore, since martyrdom is the chief thing, there are three
   points arising out of it on which we have proposed to ourselves to
   speak: What it is, how great it is, and of what advantage it is. What,
   then, is martyrdom? It is the end of sins, the limit of dangers, the
   guide of salvation, the teacher of patience, the home of life, on the
   journey to which those things moreover befall which in the coming
   crisis might be considered torments. By this also testimony is borne to
   the Name, and the majesty of the Name is greatly enhanced: not that in
   itself that majesty can be diminished, or its magnitude detracted from,
   by the guilt of one who denies it; but that it redounds to the increase
   of its glory, when the terror of the populace that howls around is
   giving to suffering, fearless minds, and by the threats of snarling
   hatred is adding to the title whereby Christ has desired to crown the
   man, that in proportion as he has thought that he conquered, in that
   proportion his courage has grown in the struggle. It is then,
   therefore, that all the vigour of faith is brought to bear, then
   facility of belief is approved, when you encounter the speeches and the
   reproaches of the rabble, [4839] and when you strengthen yourself by a
   religious mind against those madnesses of the people,--overcoming, that
   is, and repelling whatever their blasphemous speech may have uttered to
   wrong Christ in your person; as when the resisting breakwater repels
   the adverse sea, although the waves dash and the rolling water again
   and again beats upon it, yet its immoveable strength abides firm, and
   does not yield even when covered over by the waves that foam around,
   until its force is scattered over the rocks and loses itself, and the
   conquered billow lying upon the rocks retires forth into the open
   spaces of the shore.

   5. For what is there in these speeches other than empty discourse, and
   senseless talk, and a depraved pleasure in meaningless words? As it is
   written:  "They have eyes, and they see not; ears have they, and they
   hear not." [4840]   "Their foolish heart is made sluggish, lest at any
   time they should be converted, and I should heal them." [4841] For
   there is no doubt but that He said this of all whose hardened mind and
   obstinate brutality of heart is always driven away and repugnates from
   a vital devotion, folly leading them, madness dragging them, in fine,
   every kind of ferocity enraging them, whereby they are instigated as
   well as carried away, so that in their case their own deeds would be
   sufficient for their punishment, their guilt would burden the very
   penalty of the persecution inflicted.

   6. The whole of this tends to the praise of martyrdom, the whole
   illuminates the glory of suffering wherein the hope of time future is
   beheld, wherein Christ Himself is engaged, of whom are given the
   examples that we seek, and whose is the strength by which we resist.
   And that in this behalf something is supplied to us to present, is
   surely a lofty and marvellous condescension, and such as we are able
   neither mentally to conceive nor fully to express in words. For what
   could He with His liberal affection bestow upon us more, than that He
   should be the first to show forth in Himself what He would reward with
   a crown in others? He became mortal that we might be immortal, and He
   underwent the issue of human destiny, by whom things human are
   governed; and that He might appear to have given to us the benefit of
   His having suffered, He gave us confession. He suggested martyrdoms;
   finally, He, by the merits of His nativity, imputed all those things
   whereby the light (of life) may be quenched, to a saving remedy, by His
   excellent humility, by His divine strength. Whoever have deserved to be
   worthy of this have been without death, have overcome all the foulest
   stains of the world, having subdued the condition of death.

   7. For there is no doubt how much they obtain from the Lord, who have
   preferred God's name to their own safety, so that in that judgment-day
   their blood-shedding would make them better, and the blood spilt would
   show them to be spotless.  Because death makes life more complete,
   death rather leads to glory. Thus, whenever on the rejoicing
   wheat-stalks the ears of corn distended by rains grow full, the
   abundant harvests are forced [4842] by the summer; thus, as often as
   the vine is pruned by the knife from the tendrils that break forth upon
   it, the bunch of grapes is more liberally clothed. For whatever is of
   advantage by its injury turns out for the increase of the time to come;
   just as it has often been of avail to the fields to let loose the
   flames, that by the heat of the wandering conflagration the blind
   breathing-holes of the earth might be relaxed. It has been useful to
   parch the light stalks with the crackling fire, that the pregnant
   corn-field might raise itself higher, and a more abundant grain might
   flourish on the breeding stems. Therefore such also is first of all the
   calamity, and by and by the fruit of martyrdom, that it so contemns
   death, that it may preserve life in death.

   8. For what is so illustrious and sublime, as by a robust devotion to
   preserve all the vigour of faith in the midst of so many weapons of
   executioners? What so great and honourable, as in the midst of so many
   swords of the surrounding guards, again and again to profess in
   repeated words the Lord of one's liberty and the author of one's
   salvation?--and especially if you set before your eyes that there is
   nothing more detestable than dishonour, nothing baser than slavery,
   that now you ought to seek nothing else, to ask for nothing else, than
   that you should be snatched from the slaughters of the world, be
   delivered from the ills of the world, and be engaged only as an alien
   from the contagion of earth, among the ruins of a globe that is
   speedily to perish? For what have you to do with this light, if you
   have the promise of an eternal light? What interest have you in this
   commerce of life and nature, if the amplitude of heaven is awaiting
   you? Doubtless let that lust of life keep hold, but let it be of those
   whom for unatoned sin the raging fire will torture with eternal
   vengeance for their crimes. Let that lust of life keep hold, but let it
   be of those to whom it is both a punishment to die, and a torment to
   endure (after death). But to you both the world itself is subjected,
   and the earth yields, if, when all are dying, you are reserved for this
   fate of being a martyr. Do we not behold daily dyings? We behold new
   kinds of death of the body long worn out with raging diseases, the
   miserable results of some plague hitherto unexperienced; and we behold
   the destruction of wasted cities, and hence we may acknowledge how
   great is to be considered the dignity of martyrdom, to the attainment
   of the glory of which even the pestilence is beginning to compel us.
   [4843]

   9. Moreover, beloved brethren, regard, I beseech you, this
   consideration more fully; for in it both salvation is involved, and
   sublimity accounted of, although I am not unaware that you abundantly
   know that we are supported by the judgments of all who stand fast, and
   that you are not ignorant that this is the teaching handed down to us,
   that we should maintain the power of so great a Name without any dread
   of the warfare; because we whom once the desire of an everlasting
   remembrance has withheld from the longing for this light, and whom the
   anticipations of the future have wrenched away, and whom the society of
   Christ so longed for has kept aloof from all wickedness, shrink from
   offering our soul to death except it be in the way of yielding to a
   mischief, and that those benefits of God must no longer be retained and
   clung to by us, since beyond the burning up of these things the reward
   is so great as that human infirmity can hardly attain sufficiently to
   speak of it. Heaven lies open to our blood; the dwelling-place of
   Gehenna gives way to our blood; and among all the attainments of glory,
   the title of blood is sealed as the fairest, and its crown is
   designated as most complete.

   10. Thus, whenever the soldier returns from the enemy laden with
   triumphant spoils, he rejoices in his wounds.  Thus, whenever the
   sailor, long harassed with tempests, arrives at safe shores, he reckons
   his happiness by the dangers that he has suffered. For, unless I am
   mistaken, that is assuredly a joyous labour whereby safety is found.
   Therefore all things must be suffered, all things must be endured; nor
   should we desire the means of rejoicing for a brief period, and being
   punished with a perpetual burning. For you ought to remember that you
   are bound, as it were, by a certain federal paction, out of which
   arises the just condition either of obtaining salvation, or the merited
   fearfulness of punishment. You stand equally among adverse things and
   prosperous, in the midst of arms and darts; and on the one hand,
   worldly ambition, on the other heavenly greatness, incites you.

   11. If you fear to lose salvation, know that you can die; and,
   moreover, death should be contemned by you, for whom Christ was slain.
   Let the examples of the Lords passion, I beseech you, pass before your
   eyes; let the offerings, and the rewards, and the distinctions prepared
   come together before you, and look carefully at both events, how great
   a difficulty they have between them. For you will not be able to
   confess unless you know what a great mischief you do if you deny.
   Martyrs rejoice in heaven; the fire will consume those who are enemies
   of the truth. The paradise of God blooms for the witnesses; Gehenna
   will enfold the deniers, and eternal fire will burn them up. And, to
   say nothing of other matters, this assuredly ought rather to urge us,
   that the confession of one word is maintained by the everlasting
   confession of Christ; as it is written, "Whosoever shall confess me on
   earth before men, him also will I confess before my Father, and before
   His angels." [4844]   To this are added, by way of an enhancement of
   glory, the adornments of virtue; for He says, "The righteous shall
   shine as sparks that run to and fro among the stubble; they shall judge
   the nations, and shall have dominion over the peoples." [4845]

   12. For it is a great glory, beloved brethren, to adorn the life of
   eternal salvation with the dignity of suffering: it is a great
   sublimity before the face of the Lord, and under the gaze of Christ, to
   contemn without a shudder the torments inflicted by human power. Thus
   Daniel, by the constancy of his faith, overcame the threats of the king
   and the fury of raging lions, in that he believed that none else than
   God was to be adored. Thus, when the young men were thrown into the
   furnace, the fire raged against itself, because, being righteous, they
   endured the flames, and guarded against those of Gehenna, by believing
   in God, whence also they received things worthy of them: they were not
   delayed to a future time: they were not reserved for the reward of
   eternal salvation. God saw their faith; that what they had promised to
   themselves to see after their death, they merited to see in their body.
   For how great a reward was given them in the present tribulation could
   not be estimated. If there was cruelty, it gave way; if there was
   flame, it stood still. For there was one mind to all of them, which
   neither violence could break down nor wrath could subvert; nor could
   the fear of death restrain them from the obedience of devotion. Whence
   by the Lord's grace it happened, that in this manner the king himself
   appeared rather to be punished in those men (who were slain), whilst
   they escape whom he had thought to slay.

   13. And now, beloved brethren, I shall come to that point whence I
   shall very easily be able to show you how highly the virtue of
   martyrdom is esteemed, which, although it is well known to all, and is
   to be desired on account of the insignia of its inborn glory, yet in
   the desire of its enjoyment has received more enhancement from the
   necessity of the times. Because if any one be crowned at that season in
   which he supposes himself to be crowned, if perchance he should die, he
   is greatly rewarded. Therefore, sublime and illustrious as martyrdom
   is, it is the more needful now, when the world itself is turned upside
   down, and, while the globe is partially shattered, failing nature is
   giving evidence of the tokens of its final destruction. For the
   rain-cloud hangs over us in the sky, and the very air stretches forth
   the mournful rain (curtain); and as often as the black tempest
   threatens the raging sea, the glittering lightning-flashes glow
   terribly in the midst of the opening darkness of the clouds. Moreover,
   when the deep is lashed into immense billows, by degrees the wave is
   lifted up, and by degrees the foam whitens, until at length you behold
   it rush in such a manner, that on those rocks on which it is hurled, it
   throws its foam higher than the wave that was vomited forth by the
   swelling sea. You read that it is written, that we must pay even the
   uttermost farthing. But the martyrs alone are relieved of this
   obligation; because they who trust to their desires for eternal
   salvation, and have overcome their longings for this life, have been
   made by the Lord's precepts free from the universal suffering. [4846]
   Therefore from this especially, beloved brethren, we shall be able to
   set forth what great things the virtue of martyrdom is able to fulfil.

   14. And, to pass over everything else, we ought to remember what a
   glory it is to come immaculate to Christ--to be a sharer in His
   suffering, and to reign in a perpetual eternity with the Lord--to be
   free from the threatening destruction of the world, and not to be mixed
   up with the bloody carnage of wasting diseases in a common lot with
   others; and, not to speak of the crown itself, if, being situated in
   the midst of these critical evils of nature, you had the promise of an
   escape from this life, would you not rejoice with all your heart? If, I
   say, while tossing amid the tempests of this world, a near repose
   should invite you, would you not consider death in the light of a
   remedy? Thus, surrounded as you are with the knives of the
   executioners, and the instruments of testing tortures, stand sublime
   and strong, considering how great is the penalty of denying, in a time
   when you are unable to enjoy, the world for the sake of which you would
   deny, because indeed the Lord knew that cruel torments and mischievous
   acts of punishment would be armed against us for our destruction, in
   order that He might make us strong to endure them all. "My son," says
   He, "if thou come to serve God, stand fast in righteousness, and fear,
   and prepare thy soul for temptation." [4847] Moreover, also, the
   blessed Apostle Paul exclaimed, and said, "To me to live is Christ, and
   to die is gain." [4848]

   15. Wherefore, beloved brethren, with a firm faith, with a robust
   devotion, with a virtue opposed to the fierce threatenings of the
   world, and the savage murmurs of the attending crowds, we must resist
   and not fear, seeing that ours is the hope of eternity and heavenly
   life, and that our ardour is inflamed with the longing for the light,
   and our salvation rejoices in the promise of immortality. But the fact
   that our hands are bound with tightened bonds, and that heavy links
   fastened round our necks oppress us with their solid weight, or that
   our body strained on the rack hisses on the red-hot plates, is not for
   the sake of seeking our blood, but for the sake of trying us. [4849]
   For in what manner should we be able to recognise even the dignity of
   martyrdom, if we were not constrained to desire it, even at the price
   of the sacrifice of our body? I indeed have known it, and I am not
   deceived in the truth of what I say, when the cruel hands of the
   persecutors were wrenching asunder the martyr's limbs, and the furious
   torturer was ploughing up his lacerated muscles, and still could not
   overcome him. I have known it by the words of those who stood around.
   [4850] "This is a great matter. Assuredly I know not what it is--that
   he is not subdued by suffering, that he is not broken down by wearing
   torments." Moreover, there were other words of those who spoke: "And
   yet I believe he has children: for he has a wife associated with him in
   his house; and yet he does not give way to the bond of his offspring,
   nor is he withdrawn by the claim of his family affection from his
   stedfast purpose. This matter must be known, and this strength must be
   investigated, even to the very heart; for that is no trifling
   confession, whatever it may be, for which a man suffers, even so as to
   be able to die."

   16. Moreover, beloved brethren, so great is the virtue of martyrdom,
   that by its means even he who has wished to slay you is constrained to
   believe. It is written, and we read: "Endure in suffering, and in thy
   humiliation have patience, because gold and silver are tried by the
   fire." [4851] Since, therefore, the Lord proves us by earthly
   temptations, and Christ the Judge weighs us by these worldly ills, we
   must congratulate ourselves, and rejoice that He does not reserve us
   for those eternal destructions, but rejoices over us as purged from all
   contagion. But from those whom He adopts as partners of His
   inheritance, and is willing to receive into the kingdom of heaven, what
   else indeed does He ask than a walk in integrity? He Himself has said
   that all things are His, both those things which are displayed upon the
   level plains, and which lift themselves up into sloping hills; and
   moreover, whatever the greatness of heaven surrounds, and what the
   gliding water embraces in the circumfluent ocean. But if all things are
   within His ken, and He does not require of us anything but sincere
   actions, we ought, as He Himself has said, to be like to gold. Because,
   when you behold in the glistening ore [4852] the gold glittering under
   the tremulous light, and melting into a liquid form by the roaring
   flames (for this also is generally the care of the workmen), whenever
   from the panting furnaces is vomited forth the glowing fire, the rich
   flame is drawn away from the access of the earth in a narrow channel,
   and is kept back by sand from the refluent masses of earth. Whence it
   is necessary to suffer all things, that we may be free from all
   wickedness, as He has said by His prophet: "And though in the sight of
   men they have suffered torments, yet is their hope full of immortality;
   and being vexed in a few things, they shall be well rewarded in many
   things, because God has tried them, and has found them worthy of
   Himself, and has received them as a sacrifice of burnt-offering."
   [4853]

   17. But if ambitious dignity deter you, and the amount of your money
   heaped up in your stores influence you--a cause which ever distracts
   the intentions of a virtuous heart, and assails the soul devoted to its
   Lord with a fearful trembling--I beg that you would again refer to the
   heavenly words.  For it is the very voice of Christ who speaks, and
   says, "Whosoever shall lose his life for my name's sake, shall receive
   in this world a hundred fold, and in the world to come shall possess
   eternal life." [4854] And we ought assuredly to reckon nothing greater,
   nothing more advantageous, than this. For although in the nature of
   your costly garments the purple dye flows into figures, and in the
   slackening threads the gold strays into a pattern, and the weighty
   metals to which you devote yourselves are not wanting in your excavated
   treasures; still, unless I am mistaken, those things will be esteemed
   vain and purposeless, if, while all things else are added to you,
   salvation alone is found to be wanting; even as the Holy Spirit
   declares that we can give nothing in exchange for our soul. For He
   says, "If you should gain the whole world, and lose your own soul, what
   shall it profit you, or what exchange shall a man give for his soul?"
   [4855] For all those things which we behold are worthless, and such as
   resting on weak foundations, are unable to sustain the weight of their
   own mass. For whatever is received from the world is made of no account
   by the antiquity of time. Whence, that nothing should be sweet or dear
   that might be preferred to the desires of eternal life, things which
   are of personal right and individual law are cut off by the Lord's
   precepts; so that in the undergoing of tortures, for instance, the son
   should not soften the suffering father, and private affection should
   not change the heart that was previously pledged to enduring strength,
   into another disposition. Christ of His own right ordained that truth
   and salvation alone must be embraced in the midst of great sufferings,
   under which wife, and children, and grandchildren, under which all the
   offspring of one's bowels, must be forsaken, and the victory be
   claimed.

   18. For Abraham also thus pleased God, in that he, when tried by God,
   spared not even his own son, in behalf of whom perhaps he might have
   been pardoned had he hesitated to slay him. A religious devotion armed
   his hands; and his paternal love, at the command of the Lord who bade
   it, set aside all the feelings of affection. Neither did it shock him
   that he was to shed the blood of his son, nor did he tremble at the
   word; nevertheless for him Christ had not yet been slain. For what is
   dearer than He who, that you might not sustain anything unwillingly in
   the present day, first of all Himself suffered that which He taught
   others to suffer? What is sweeter than He who, although He is our God
   and Lord, nevertheless makes the man who suffers for His sake His
   fellow-heir in the kingdom of heaven? Oh grand--I know not
   what!--whether that reason scarcely bears to receive that
   consciousness, although it always marvels at the greatness of the
   rewards; or that the majesty of God is so abundant, that to all who
   trust in it, it even offers those things which, while we were
   considering what we have done, it had been sin to desire.  Moreover, if
   only eternal salvation should be given, for that very perpetuity of
   living we should be thankful. But now, when heaven and the power of
   judging concerning others is bestowed in the eternal world, what is
   there wherein man's mediocrity may not find itself equal to all these
   trials? If you are assailed with injuries, He was first so assailed. If
   you are oppressed with reproaches, you are imitating the experience of
   God. Whence also it is but a little matter whatever you undergo for
   Him, seeing that you can do nothing more, unless that in this consists
   the whole of salvation, that He has promised the whole to martyrdom.
   Finally, the apostle, to whom all things were always dear, while he
   deeply marvelled at the greatness of the promised benefits, said, "I
   reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
   compared to the glory that is to follow, which shall be revealed in
   us." [4856] Because he was musing in his own mind how great would be
   the reward, that to him to whom it would be enough to be free from
   death, should be given not only the prerogative of salvation, but also
   to ascend to heaven: to heaven which is not constrained into darkness,
   even when light is expelled from it, and the day does not unfold into
   light by alternate changes; but the serene temperature of the liquid
   air unfolds a pure brightness through a clearness that reddens with a
   fiery glow.

   19. It now remains, beloved brethren, that we are bound to show what is
   the advantage of martyrdom, and that we should teach that especially,
   so that the fear of the future may stimulate us to this glorious title.
   Because those to whom great things are promised, seem to have greater
   things which they are bound to fear. For the soldier does not arouse
   himself to arms before the enemy have brandished their hostile weapons;
   nor does a man withdraw his ship in an anchorage, unless the fear of
   the deep have checked his courage. Moreover also, while eager for his
   wealth, the considerate husbandman does not stir up the earth with a
   fortunate ploughshare, before the crumbling glebe is loosened into dust
   by the rain that it has received. Thus this is the natural practice of
   every man, to be ignorant of what is of advantage, unless you recognise
   what has been mischievous. Whence also a reward is given to all the
   saints, in that the punishment of their deeds is inflicted on the
   unrighteous. Therefore what the Lord has promised to His people is
   doubtful to none, however ignorant he is; but neither is there any
   doubt what punitive fires He threatens. And since my discourse has led
   me thus to argue about both these classes of things in a few words, as
   I have already spoken of both, I will briefly explain them.

   20. A horrible place, of which the name is Gehenna, with an awful
   murmuring and groaning of souls bewailing, and with flames belching
   forth through the horrid darkness of thick night, is always breathing
   out the raging fires of a smoking furnace, while the confined mass of
   flames is restrained or relaxed for the various purposes of punishment.
   Then there are very many degrees of its violence, as it gathers into
   itself whatever tortures the consuming fire of the heat emitted can
   supply. Those by whom the voice of the Lord has been rejected, and His
   control contemned, it punishes with different dooms; and in proportion
   to the different degree of deserving of the forfeited salvation it
   applies its power, while a portion assigns its due distinction to
   crime. And some, for example, are bowed down by an intolerable load,
   some are hurried by a merciless force over the abrupt descent of a
   precipitous path, and the heavy weight of clanking chains bends over
   them its bondage.  Some there are, also, whom a wheel is closely
   turning, and an unwearied dizziness tormenting; and others whom, bound
   to one another with tenacious closeness, body clinging to body
   compresses: so that both fire is devouring, and the load of iron is
   weighing down, and the uproar of many is torturing.

   21. But those by whom God has always been sought or known, have never
   lost the position which Christ has given them, where grace is found,
   where in the verdant fields the luxuriant earth clothes itself with
   tender grass, and is pastured with the scent of flowers; where the
   groves are carried up to the lofty hill-top, and where the tree clothes
   with a thicker foliage whatever spot the canopy, expanded by its
   curving branches, may have shaded. There is no excess of cold or of
   heat, nor is it needed that in autumn the fields should rest, or, again
   in the young spring, that the fruitful earth should bring forth. All
   things are of one season: fruits are borne of a continued summer, since
   there neither does the moon serve the purpose of her months, nor does
   the sun run his course along the moments of the hours, nor does the
   banishment of the light make way for night. A joyous repose possesses
   the people, a calm home shelters them, where a gushing fountain in the
   midst issues from the bosom of a broken hollow, and flows in sinuous
   mazes by a course deep-sounding, at intervals to be divided among the
   sources of rivers springing from it. Here there is the great praise of
   martyrs, here is the noble crown of the victors, who have the promise
   of greater things than those whose rewards are more abundant. And that
   either their body is thrown to wild beasts, or the threatening sword is
   not feared, is shown as the reason of their dignity, is manifested as
   the ground of their election. Because it would have been inconsistent,
   that he who had been judged equal to such a duty, should be kept among
   earthly vices and corruptions.

   22. For you deserve, O excellent martyrs, that nothing should be denied
   to you who are nourished with the hope of eternity and of light; whose
   absolute devotion, and whose mind dedicated to the service of heaven,
   is evidently seen.  Deservedly, I say deservedly, nothing to you is
   forbidden to wish for, since by your soul this world is looked down
   upon, and the alienated appearance of the time has made you to shudder,
   as if it were a confused blindness of darkness; to whom this world is
   always regarded in the light of a dungeon, its dwellings for
   restraints, in a life which has always been esteemed by you as a period
   of delay on a journey. Thus, indeed, in the triumph of victory he is
   snatched from these evils, whom no vain ambition with pompous step has
   subdued, nor popular greatness has elated, but whom, burning with
   heavenly desire, Christ has added to His kingdom.

   23. There is nothing, then, so great and venerable as the deliverance
   from death, and the causing to live, and the giving to reign for ever.
   This is fitting for the saints, needful for the wretched, pleasing to
   all, in which the good rejoice, the abject are lifted up, the elect are
   crowned. Assuredly God, who cares for all, gave to life a certain
   medicine as it were in martyrdom, when to some He assigned it on
   account of their deserving, to others He gave it on account of His
   mercy. We have assuredly seen very many distinguished by their faith,
   come to claim this illustrious name, that death might ennoble the
   obedience of their devotion. Moreover, also, we have frequently beheld
   others stand undismayed, that they might redeem their sins committed,
   and be regarded as washed in their gore by His blood; and so being
   slain they might live again, who when alive were counted slain.  Death
   assuredly makes life more complete, death finds the glory that was
   lost. For in this the hope once lost is regained, in this all salvation
   is restored. Thus, when the seed-times shall fail on the withering
   plains, and the earth shall be parched with its dying grass, the river
   has delighted to spring forth from the sloping hills, and to soothe the
   thirsty fields with its gushing streams, so that the vanquished poverty
   of the land might be dissolved into fruitful wheat-stems, and the
   corn-field might bristle up the thicker for the counterfeited showers
   of rain.

   24. What then, beloved brethren, shall I chiefly relate, or what shall
   I say? When all dignified titles thus combine in one, the mind is
   confused, the perception is misled; and in the very attempt to speak
   with brilliancy, my unworthy discourse vanishes away. For what is there
   to be said which can be sufficient, when, if you should express the
   power of eternal salvation, its attending glories come in your way; if
   you would speak of its surroundings, its greatness prevents you? The
   things at the same time are both in agreement and in opposition, and
   there is nothing which appears worthy to be uttered. Thus the instances
   of martyrdom have held in check the impulses of daring speech, as if
   entangled and ensnared by an opponent. What voice, what lungs, what
   strength, can undertake to sustain the form of such a dignity? At the
   confession of one voice, adverse things give way, joyous things appear,
   kingdoms are opened, empires are prepared, suffering is overcome, death
   is subdued, life is preferred, and the resisting weapons of a
   mischievous enemy are broken up. If there is sin, it perishes; if there
   is crime, it is left behind.  Wherefore I beseech you, weigh this in
   your minds, and from my address receive so much as you know that you
   can feel.

   25. Let it present itself to your eyes, what a day that is, when, with
   the people looking on, and all men watching, an undismayed devotion is
   struggling against earthly crosses and the threats of the world; how
   the minds in suspense, and hearts anxious about the tremblings of
   doubt, are agitated by the dread of the timid fearfulness of those who
   are congratulating them! What an anxiety is there, what a prayerful
   entreaty, what desires are recorded, when, with the victory still
   wavering, and the crown of conquest hanging in doubt over the head
   while the results are still uncertain, and when that pestilent and
   raving confession is inflamed by passion, is kindled by madness, and
   finally, is heated by the fury of the heart, and by gnashing threats!
   For who is ignorant how great a matter this is, that our, as it were,
   despised frailty, and the unexpected boldness of human strength, should
   not yield to the pangs of wounds, nor to the blows of tortures,--that a
   man should stand fast and not be moved, should be tortured and still
   not be overcome, but should rather be armed by the very suffering
   whereby he is tormented?

   26. Consider what it is, beloved brethren: set before your perceptions
   and your minds all the endurance of martyrdom. Behold, indeed, in the
   passion of any one you will, they who are called martyrs rejoice as
   being already summoned out of the world; they rejoice as being
   messengers of all good men; they rejoice in like manner as elected.
   Thus the Lord rejoices in His soldier, [4857] Christ rejoices in the
   witness to His name. It is a small matter that I am speaking of,
   beloved brethren; it is a small matter, so great a subject in this kind
   of address, and so marvellous a difficulty has been undertaken by me;
   but let the gravity of the issue, I beseech you, not be wanting for my
   own purpose, knowing that as much can be said of martyrdom as could be
   appreciated. Whence also this alone has been the reason of my
   describing its glory, not that I judged myself equal and fitted for its
   praise, but that I saw that there was such a virtue in it, that however
   little I might say about it, I should profess that I had said as much
   as possible. For although the custody of faith may be preferred to the
   benefit of righteousness, and an immaculate virginity may recognise
   itself as better than the praises of all; yet it is necessary that even
   it should give place to the claim of blood, and be made second to a
   gory death. The former have chosen what is good, the latter have
   imitated Christ.

   27. But now, beloved brethren, lest any one should think that I have
   placed all salvation in no other condition than in martyrdom, let him
   first of all look especially at this, that it is not I who seem to
   speak, that am of so great importance, nor is the order of things so
   arranged that the promised hope of immortality should depend on the
   strength of a partial advocacy. But since the Lord has testified with
   His own mouth, that in the Father's possession are many dwellings, I
   have believed that there is nothing greater than that glory whereby
   those men are proved who are unworthy of this worldly life. Therefore,
   beloved brethren, striving with a religious rivalry, as if stirred up
   with some incentive of reward, let us submit to all the abundance and
   the endurance of strength.  For things passing away ought not to move
   us, seeing that they are always being pressed forward to their own
   overthrow, not only by the law proposed to them, but even by the very
   end of time. John exclaims, and says, "Now is the axe laid to the root
   of the tree;" [4858] showing, to wit, and pointing out that it is the
   last old age of all things.  Moreover, also, the Lord Himself says,
   "Walk while ye have the light, lest the darkness lay hold upon you."
   [4859] But if He has foretold that we must walk in that time, certainly
   He shows that we must at any rate walk.

   28. And to return to the praise of martyrdom, there is a word of the
   blessed Paul, who says:  "Know ye not that they who run in a race
   strive many, but one receiveth the prize? But do ye so run, that all of
   you may obtain." [4860]   Moreover also elsewhere, that he may exhort
   us to martyrdom, he has called us fellow-heirs with Christ; nay, that
   he might omit nothing, he says, "If ye are dead with Christ, why, as if
   living in the world, do ye make distinctions?" [4861] Because, dearest
   brethren, we who bear the rewards of resurrection, who seek for the day
   of judgment, who, in fine, are trusting that we shall reign with
   Christ, ought to be dead to the world. For you can neither desire
   martyrdom till you have first hated the world, nor attain to God's
   reward unless you have loved Christ. And he who loves Christ does not
   love the world. For Christ was given up by the world, even as the world
   also was given up by Christ; as it is written, "The world is crucified
   unto me, and I unto the world." [4862] The world has been an object of
   affection to none whom the Lord has not previously condemned; nor could
   he enjoy eternal salvation who has gloried in the life of the world.
   That is the very voice of Christ, who says:  "He that loveth his life
   in this world, shall lose it in the world to come; but he that hateth
   his life in this world, shall find it in the world to come." [4863]
   Moreover, also, the Apostle Paul says: "Be ye imitators of me, as I
   also am of Christ." [4864]   And the same elsewhere says: "I wish that
   all of you, if it were possible, should be imitators of me." [4865]

   29. He said this who suffered, and who suffered for this cause, that he
   might imitate the Lord; and assuredly he wished us also to suffer for
   this cause, that through him we might imitate Christ. If thou art
   righteous, and believest in God, why fearest thou to shed thy blood for
   Him whom thou knowest to have so often suffered for thee? In Isaiah He
   was sawn asunder, in Abel He was slain, in Isaac He was offered up, in
   Joseph He was sold into slavery, in man He was crucified. And I say
   nothing of other matters, such as neither my discourse is able to tell
   nor my mind to bear. My consciousness is overcome by the example of His
   humility; and when it considers what things befell when He suffered, it
   marvels that He should suffer on whose behalf all things quaked. The
   day fled into the night; the light gave up all things into darkness;
   and, its mass being inclined backwards and forwards, the whole earth
   was jarred, and burst open; the dead [4866] were disturbed, the graves
   were laid bare, and as the tombs gaped open into the rent of the earth,
   bodies returning to the light were restored; the world trembled at the
   flowing of His blood; and the veil which hung from the opening of the
   temple was rent, and all the temple uttered a groan. For which cause it
   is a great matter to imitate Him who, in dying, convicted the world.
   Therefore when, after the example of the Lord's passion, and after all
   the testimony of Christ, you lay down your life, and fear not to shed
   your blood, everything must absolutely give way to martyrdom.
   Inestimable is the glory of martyrdom, infinite its measure, immaculate
   its victory, invaluable its title, immense its triumph; because he who
   is presented to Him with the special glory of a confessor, is adorned
   with the kindred blood of Christ.

   30. Therefore, beloved brethren, although this is altogether of the
   Lord's promise and gift, and although it is given from on high, and is
   not received except by His will, and moreover, can neither be expressed
   in words nor described by speech, nor can be satisfied by any kind of
   powers of eloquence, still such will be your benevolence, such will be
   your charity and love, as to be mindful of me when the Lord shall begin
   to glorify martyrdom in your experience. That holy altar [4867]
   encloses you within itself, that great dwelling-place of the venerable
   Name encloses you within itself, as if in the folds of a heart's
   embrace: the powers of the everlasting age sustain you, and that by
   which you shall ever reign and shall ever conquer. O blessed ones! and
   such as truly have your sins remitted, if, however, you who are
   Christ's peers ever have sinned! [4868] O blessed ones! whom the blood
   of the Lord has dyed from the beginning of the world, and whom such a
   brightness of snowy clothing has deservedly invested, and the whiteness
   of the enfolding robe has adorned!  Finally, I myself seem to myself to
   behold already, and, as far as is possible to the mind of man, that
   divine and illustrious thing occurs to my eyes and view. I seem, I say
   to myself, already to behold, that that truly noble army accompanies
   the glory and the path of their Christ. The blessed band of victors
   will go before His face; and as the crowds become denser, the whole
   army, illuminated as it were by the rising of the sun, will ascribe to
   Him the power. And would that it might be the lot of such a poor
   creature as myself to see that sight! But the Lord can do what He is
   believed not to deny to your petitions. [4869]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4835] [Erasmus doubts as to the authorship, judging from the style.
   Pamelius is sure it is Cyprian's.]

   [4836] In place of reward, he sets before them not only security from
   the fear of Gehenna, but also the attainment of everlasting life,
   describing both alternatives briefly in a poetical manner. He points
   out, that to some, martyrdom serves as a crown, while to others who are
   baptized in their own blood, it serves as redemption. Finally, when
   from the Scriptures he has stirred up his readers to confession of the
   name of Christ, he asks them to remember him when the Lord begins to
   honour martyrdom in them, since the Lord is known not to deny such as
   they when they ask Him for anything.

   [4837] "Habena;" but according to Baluzius "avena," "an oatstraw."

   [4838] [Acts ix. 5. The principle is recognised in the words, "Ye did
   it unto me," where Christ identifies Himself with members of His body.
   Oh, the condescension!  Heb. ii. 11.]

   [4839] [Ps. lxiv. 3. The revilings of the multitude are reckoned by the
   Psalmist among the most cruel tortures of Christ; and we cannot doubt
   that the early Christians found the like cruelty of the heathen a daily
   martyrdom, before they came to their crowning passion. Compare
   Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 712.]

   [4840] Ps. cxiii. 13.

   [4841] Isa. vi. 10.

   [4842] "Coguntur," or "coquuntur,"--"are matured."

   [4843] [The heathen attributed this pestilence to the "atheism" of
   Christians, and hence persecuted them the more fiercely; and, as it was
   better to die by martyrdom than by the pestilence, he thus speaks.
   Death an advantage. Shaks., Hen. V., act. iv. sc. 1.]

   [4844] Luke xxii. 8.

   [4845] Wisd. iii. 7.

   [4846] [The sufferings of this life are here supposed to be retributive
   in the case of those who must be weaned from the world. Martyrs have
   weaned themselves, and go gladly to their rest.]

   [4847] Ecclus. ii. 1.

   [4848] Phil. i. 21.

   [4849] [The terrible pictures in S. Stefano Rotondo (see p. 288, supra)
   might seem to have been taken from this graphic treatise. Can our faith
   and love be compared with that of these sufferers?]

   [4850] [To me, these dramatic narrations of what was going on among the
   crowds that gazed upon the tortures of Christ's witnesses, are very
   suggestive of the whole scene. Compare pp. 295-296, supra.]

   [4851] Ecclus. ii. 4.

   [4852] Or, "earth."

   [4853] Wisd. iii. 4.

   [4854] Matt. x. 39.

   [4855] Matt. xv. 26.

   [4856] Rom. viii. 18.

   [4857] [The adoption of "the sign of the cross," after the immersion of
   baptism, is referable to this martyr-age. It was meant to impress the
   idea of soldiership.]

   [4858] Matt. iii. 10. [Elucidation II.]

   [4859] John xii. 35.

   [4860] 1 Cor. ix. 24.

   [4861] Col. ii. 20; "decernitis."

   [4862] Gal. vi. 14. [Compare Ep. xxv. p. 303, supra.]

   [4863] Matt. x. 39.

   [4864] 1 Cor. vi. 4.

   [4865] 1 Cor. vii. 7.

   [4866] Or, "Manes."

   [4867] [Rev. vi. 9; also vol. i. p. 486, note 10, this series.]

   [4868] ["Si tamen qui Christi compares estis aliquando peccastis;" not
   very happily translated, but extravagant at best.]

   [4869] [Think, I say again, of three hundred years of such "fiery
   trial," so marvellously sustained, and we shall gain new views of
   Christ's power to perfect His own strength in human weakness. The life
   of these Christians was a conscious daily warfare against "the world,
   the flesh, and the devil;" and we must recognise this in all judgments
   of their discipline and their modes of thought.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Of the Discipline and Advantage of Chastity. [4870]

   ------------------------

   1. I do not conceive that I have exceeded any portions of my duty, in
   always striving as much as possible, by daily discussions of the
   Gospels, to afford to you from time to time the means of growth, by the
   Lord's help, in faith and knowledge. For what else can be effected in
   the Lord's Church with greater advantage, what can be found more
   suitable to the office of a bishop, than that, by the teaching of the
   divine words, recommended and commented on by Him, believers should be
   enabled to attain to the promised kingdom of heaven? This assuredly, as
   the desired result day by day of my work as well as of my office, I
   endeavour, notwithstanding my absence, to accomplish; and by my letters
   I try to make myself present to you, addressing you in faith, in my
   usual manner, by the exhortations that I send you. I call upon you,
   therefore, to be established in the power of the Root [4871] of the
   Gospel, and to stand always armed against all the assaults of the
   devil. I shall not believe myself to be absent from you, if I shall be
   sure of you. Nevertheless, everything which is advantageously set
   forth, and which either defines or promises the condition of eternal
   life to those who are investigating it, is then only profitable, if it
   be aided in attaining the reward of the effort by the power of the
   divine mercy. We not only set forth words which come from the sacred
   fountains of the Scriptures, but with these very words we associate
   prayers to the Lord, and wishes, that, as well to us as to you, He
   would not only unfold the treasures of His sacraments, but would bestow
   strength for the carrying into act of what we know.  For the danger is
   all the greater if we know the Lord's will, and loiter in the work of
   the will of God.

   2. Although, therefore, I exhort you always, as you are aware, to many
   things, and to the precepts of the Lord's admonition--for what else can
   be desirable or more important to me, than that in all things you
   should stand perfect in the Lord?--yet I admonish you, that you should
   before all things maintain the barriers of chastity, as also you do:
   knowing that you are the temple of the Lord, the members of Christ, the
   habitation of the Holy Spirit, elected to hope, consecrated to faith,
   destined to salvation, sons of God, brethren of Christ, associates of
   the Holy Spirit, owing nothing any longer to the flesh, as born again
   of water, that the chastity, over and above the will, which we should
   always desire to be ours, may be afforded to us also, on account of the
   redemption, that that which has been consecrated by Christ might not be
   corrupted. For if the apostle declares the Church to be the spouse of
   Christ, I beseech you consider what chastity is required, where the
   Church is given in marriage as a betrothed virgin. And I indeed, except
   that I have proposed to admonish you with brevity, think the most
   diffuse praises due, and could set forth abundant laudations of
   chastity; but I have thought it superfluous to praise it at greater
   length among those who practise it. For you adorn it while you exhibit
   it; and in its exercise you set forth its more abundant praises, being
   made its ornament, while it also is yours, each lending and borrowing
   honour from the other. It adds to you the discipline of good morals;
   you confer upon it the ministry of saintly works. For how much and what
   it can effect has on the one hand been manifest by your means, and on
   the other it has shown and taught what you are wishing for,--the two
   advantages of precepts and practice being combined into one, that
   nothing should appear maimed, as would be the case if either principles
   were wanting to service, or service to principles.

   3. Chastity is the dignity of the body, the ornament of morality, the
   sacredness of the sexes, the bond of modesty, the source of purity, the
   peacefulness of home, the crown of concord. [4872]   Chastity is not
   careful whom it pleases but itself. Chastity is always modest, being
   the mother of innocency; chastity is ever adorned with modesty alone,
   then rightly conscious of its own beauty if it is displeasing to the
   wicked. Chastity seeks nothing in the way of adornments: it is its own
   glory. It is this which commends us to the Lord, unites us with Christ;
   it is this which drives out from our members all the illicit conflicts
   of desire, instils peace into our bodies: blessed itself, and making
   those blessed, whoever they are, in whom it condescends to dwell. It is
   that which even they who possess it not can never accuse; it is even
   venerable to its enemies, since, they admire it much more because they
   are unable to capture it. Moreover, as mature, it is both always
   excellent in men, and to be earnestly desired by women; so its enemy,
   unchastity, is always detestable, making an obscene sport for its
   servants, sparing neither bodies nor souls. For, their own proper
   character being overcome, it sends the entire man under its yoke of
   lust, alluring at first, that it may do the more mischief by its
   attraction,--the foe of continency, exhausting both means and modesty;
   the perilous madness of lust frequently attaining to the blood, the
   destruction of a good conscience, the mother of impenitence, the ruin
   of a more virtuous age, the disgrace of one's race, driving away all
   confidence in blood and family, intruding one's own children upon the
   affections of strangers, interpolating the offspring of an unknown and
   corrupted stock into the testaments of others. And this also, very
   frequently burning without reference to sex, and not restraining itself
   within the permitted limits, thinks it little satisfaction to itself,
   unless even in the bodies of men it seeks, not a new pleasure, but goes
   in quest of extraordinary and revolting extravagances, contrary to
   nature itself, of men with men.

   4. But chastity maintains the first rank in virgins, the second in
   those who are continent, the third in the case of wedlock. Yet in all
   it is glorious, with all its degrees. For even to maintain the
   marriage-faith is a matter of praise in the midst of so many bodily
   strifes; and to have determined on a limit in marriage defined by
   continency is more virtuous still, because herein even lawful things
   are refused. [4873] Assuredly to have guarded one's purity from the
   womb, and to have kept oneself an infant even to old age throughout the
   whole of life, is certainly the part of an admirable virtue; only that
   if never to have known the body's seductive capacities is the greater
   blessedness, to have overcome them when once known is the greater
   virtue; yet still in such a sort that that virtue comes of God's gift,
   although it manifests itself to men in their members.

   5. The precepts of chastity, brethren, are ancient. Wherefore do I say
   ancient? Because they were ordained at the same time as men themselves.
   For both her own husband belongs to the woman, for the reason that
   besides him she may know no other; and the woman is given to the man
   for the purpose that, when that which had been his own had been yielded
   to him, he should seek for nothing belonging to another. [4874] And in
   such wise it is said, "Two shall be in one flesh," [4875] that what had
   been made one should return together, that a separation without return
   should not afford any occasion to a stranger. Thence also the apostle
   declares that the man is the head of the woman, that he might commend
   chastity in the conjunction of the two. For as the head cannot be
   suited to the limbs of another, so also one's limbs cannot be suited to
   the head of another: for one's head matches one's limbs, and one's
   limbs one's head; and both of them are associated by a natural link in
   mutual concord, lest, by any discord arising from the separation of the
   members, the compact of the divine covenant should be broken. Yet he
   adds, and says: "Because he who loves his wife, loves himself. For no
   one hates his own flesh; but nourishes and cherishes it, even as Christ
   the Church." [4876]   From this passage there is great authority for
   charity with chastity, if wives are to be loved by their husbands even
   as Christ loved the Church and wives ought so to love their husbands
   also as the Church loves Christ.

   6. Christ gave this judgment when, being inquired of, He said that a
   wife must not be put away, save for the cause of adultery; such honour
   did He put upon chastity. Hence arose the decree: "Ye shall not suffer
   adulteresses to live." [4877]   Hence the apostle says: "This is the
   will of God, that ye abstain from fornication." [4878] Hence also he
   says the same thing: "That the members of Christ must not be joined
   with the members of an harlot." [4879] Hence the man is delivered over
   unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, who, treading under foot
   the law of chastity, practises the vices of the flesh. Hence with
   reason adulterers do not attain the kingdom of heaven. Hence it is that
   every sin is without the body, but that the adulterer alone sins
   against his own body. Hence other authoritative utterances of the
   instructor, all of which it is not necessary at this time to collect,
   especially among you, who for the most part know and do them; and you
   cannot find cause for complaint concerning these things, even though
   they are not described. For the adulterer has not an excuse, nor could
   he have, because he might take a wife.

   7. But as laws are prescribed to matrons, who are so bound that they
   cannot thence be separated, while virginity and continency are beyond
   all law, there is nothing in the laws of matrimony which pertains to
   virginity; for by its loftiness it transcends them all. If any evil
   undertakings of men endeavour to transcend laws, virginity places
   itself on an equality with angels; moreover, if we investigate, it even
   excels them, because struggling in the flesh it gains the victory even
   against a nature which angels have not. What else is virginity than the
   glorious preparation for the future life? Virginity is of neither sex.
   Virginity is the continuance of infancy. Virginity is the triumph over
   pleasures. Virginity has no children; but what is more, it has contempt
   for offspring: it has not fruitfulness, but neither has it bereavement;
   blessed that it is free from the pain of bringing forth, more blessed
   still that it is free from the calamity of the death of children. What
   else is virginity than the freedom of liberty? It has no husband for a
   master. Virginity is freed from all affections: it is not given up to
   marriage, nor to the world, nor to children. It cannot dread
   persecution, since it cannot provoke it from its security.

   8. But since the precepts of chastity have thus briefly been set forth
   to us, let us now give an instance of chastity. For it is more
   profitable when we come in the very presence of the thing; nor will
   there be any doubt about the virtue, when that which is prescribed is
   also designated by illustrations. The example of chastity begins with
   Joseph.  A Hebrew youth, noble by his parentage, nobler by his
   innocence, on account of the envy excited by his revelations exposed
   for sale by his brethren to the Israelites, had attained to the
   household of a man of Egypt. By his obedience and his innocence, and by
   the entire faithfulness of his service, he had aroused in his favour
   the easy and kindly disposition of his master; and his appearance had
   commended itself to all men, alike by his gracious speech as by his
   youthfulness. But that same nobility of manner was received by his
   master's wife in another manner than was becoming; in a secret part of
   the house, and without witnesses,--a place high up, and fitted for
   deeds of wickedness, the unrestrained unchastity of the woman thought
   that it could overcome the youth's chastity, now by promises, now by
   threats. And when he was restrained from attempting flight by her
   holding his garments, shocked at the audacity of such a crime, tearing
   his very garments, and able to appeal to the sincerity of his naked
   body as a witness of his innocence, the rash woman did not shrink from
   adding calumny to the crime of her unchastity. Dishevelled, and raging
   that her desire should be despised, she complained both to others and
   to her husband that the Hebrew youth had attempted to use that force to
   her which she herself had striven to exercise. [4880] The husband's
   passion, unconscious of the truth, and terribly inflamed by his wife's
   accusation, is aroused; and the modest youth, because he did not defile
   his conscience with the crime, is thrust into the lowest dungeon of the
   prison. But chastity is not alone in the dungeon; for God is with
   Joseph, and the guilty are given into his charge, because he had been
   guiltless. Moreover, he dissolves the obscurities of dreams, because
   his spirit was watchful in temptations, and he is freed from chains by
   the master of the prison. He who had been an inferior in the house with
   peril, was made lord of the palace without risk; restored to his noble
   station, he received the reward of chastity and innocence by the
   judgment of God, from whom he had deserved it.

   9. But not less from a different direction arises to us another similar
   instance of chastity from the continence of women. Susanna, as we read,
   the daughter of Chelcias, the wife of Joachim, was exceedingly
   beautiful--more beautiful still in character. Her outward appearance
   added no charm to her, for she was simple: chastity had cultivated her;
   and in addition to chastity nature alone. With her, two of the elders
   had begun to be madly in love, mindful of nothing, neither of the fear
   of God, nor even of their age, already withering with years. Thus the
   flame of resuscitated lust recalled them into the glowing heats of
   their bygone youth. Robbers of chastity, they profess love, while they
   really hate. They threaten her with calumnies when she resists; the
   adulterers in wish declare themselves the accusers of adultery. And
   between these rocks of lust she sought help of the Lord, because she
   was not equal to prevailing against them by bodily strength. And the
   Lord heard from heaven chastity crying to Him; and when she,
   overwhelmed with injustice, was being led to punishment, she was
   delivered, and saw her revenge upon her enemies. Twice victorious, and
   in her peril so often and so fatally hedged in, she escaped both the
   lust and death. It will be endless if I continue to produce more
   examples; I am content with these two, especially as in these cases
   chastity has been defended with all their might.

   10. The memory of noble descent could not enervate them, although to
   some this is a suggestive licence to lasciviousness; nor the comeliness
   of their bodies, and the beauty of their well-ordered limbs, although
   for the most part this affords a hint, that being, as it were, the
   short-lived flower of an age that rapidly passes away, it should be fed
   with the offered opportunity of pleasure; nor the first years of a
   green but mature age, although the blood, still inexperienced, grows
   hot, and stimulates the natural fires, and the blind flames that stir
   in the marrow, to seek a remedy, even if they should break forth at the
   risk of modesty; nor any opportunity afforded by secrecy, or by freedom
   from witnesses, which to some seems to ensure safety, although this is
   the greatest temptation to the commission of crime, that there is no
   punishment for meditating it. Neither was a necessity laid upon them by
   the authority of those who bade them yield, and in the boldness of
   association and companionship, by which kind of temptations also
   righteous determinations are often overcome. Neither did the very
   rewards nor the kindliness, nor did the accusations, nor threats, nor
   punishments, nor death, move them; nothing was counted so cruel, so
   hard, so distressing, as to have fallen from the lofty stand of
   chastity. They were worthy of such a reward of the Divine Judge, that
   one of them should be glorified on a throne almost regal; that the
   other, endowed with her husband's sympathy, should be rescued by the
   death of her enemies. These, and such as these, are the examples ever
   to be placed before our eyes, the like of them to be meditated on day
   and night.

   11. Nothing so delights the faithful soul as the healthy consciousness
   of an unstained modesty. [4881] To have vanquished pleasure is the
   greatest pleasure; nor is there any greater victory than that which is
   gained over one's desires. He who has conquered an enemy has been
   stronger, but it was stronger than another; he who has subdued lust has
   been stronger than himself. He who has overthrown an enemy has beaten a
   foreign foe; he who has cast down desire has vanquished a domestic
   adversary. Every evil is more easily conquered than pleasure; because,
   whatever it is, the former is repulsive, the latter is attractive.
   Nothing is crushed with such difficulty as that which is armed by it.
   He who gets rid of desires has got rid of fears also; for from desires
   come fears.  He who overcomes desires, triumphs over sin; he who
   overcomes desires, shows that the mischief of the human family lies
   prostrate under his feet; he who has overcome desires, has given to
   himself perpetual peace; he who has overcome desires, restores to
   himself liberty,--a most difficult matter even for noble natures.
   Therefore we should always meditate, brethren, as these matters teach
   us, on chastity. That it may be the more easy, it is based upon no
   acquired skill. For the right will that is therein carried to
   perfection--which, were it not checked, is remote (scil. from our
   consciousness)--is still our will; so that it is not a will to be
   acquired, but that which is our own is to be cherished. [4882]

   12. For what is chastity but a virtuous mind added to watchfulness over
   the body; so that modesty observed in respect of the sexual relations,
   attested by strictness (of demeanour), should maintain honourable faith
   by an uncorrupted offspring?  Moreover, to chastity, brethren, are
   suited and are known first of all divine modesty, and the sacred
   meditation of the divine precepts, and a soul inclined to faith, and a
   mind attuned to the sacredness of religion: then carefulness that
   nothing in itself should be elaborated beyond measure, or extended
   beyond propriety; that nothing should be made a show of, nothing
   artfully coloured; that there should be nothing to pander to the
   excitement or the renewal of wiles.  She is not a modest woman who
   strives to stir up the fancy of another, even although her bodily
   chastity be preserved. Away with such as do not adorn, but prostitute
   their beauty. For anxiety about beauty is not only the wisdom of an
   evil mind, but belongs to deformity. Let the bodily nature be free, nor
   let any sort of force be intruded upon God's works. She is always
   wretched who is not satisfied to be such as she is. Wherefore is the
   colour of hair changed? Why are the edges of the eyes darkened? Why is
   the face moulded by art into a different form? Finally, why is the
   looking-glass consulted, unless from fear lest a woman should be
   herself? Moreover, the dress of a modest woman should be modest; a
   believer should not be conscious of adultery even in the mixture of
   colours. To wear gold in one's garments is as if it were desirable to
   corrupt one's garments. What do rigid metals do among the delicate
   threads of the woven textures, except to press upon the enervated
   shoulders, and unhappily to show the extravagance of a boastful soul?
   Why are the necks oppressed and hidden by outlandish stones, the prices
   of which, without workmanship, exceed the entire fortune [4883] of many
   a one? It is not the woman that is adorned, but the woman's vices that
   are manifested. What, when the fingers laden with so much gold can
   neither close nor open, is there any advantage sought for, or is it
   merely to show the empty parade of one's estate? It is a marvellous
   thing that women, tender in all things else, in bearing the burden of
   their vices are stronger than men.

   13. But to return to what I began with: chastity is ever to be
   cultivated by men and women; it is to be kept with all watchfulness
   within its bounds. The bodily nature is quickly endangered in the body,
   when the flesh, which is always falling, carries it away with itself.
   Because under the pretext of a nature which is always urging men to
   desires whereby the ruins of a decayed race are restored, deceiving
   with the enticement of pleasure, it does not lead its offspring to the
   continence of legitimate intercourse, but hurls them into crime.
   Therefore, in opposition to these fleshly snares, by which the devil
   both obtrudes himself as a companion and makes himself a leader, we
   must struggle with every kind of strength. Let the aid of Christ be
   appropriated, according to the apostle, and let the mind be withdrawn
   as much as possible from the association of the body; let consent be
   withheld from the body; let vices be always chastised, that they may be
   hated; let that misshapen and degraded shame which belongs to sin be
   kept before our eyes. Repentance itself, with all its struggles, is a
   discreditable testimony to sins committed. Let not curiosity be
   indulged in scanning other people's countenances. Let one's speech be
   brief, and one's laughter moderate, for laughter is the sign of an easy
   and a negligent disposition; and let all contact, even that which is
   becoming, be avoided. [4884] Let no indulgence be permitted to the
   body, when bodily vice is to be avoided. Let it be considered how
   honourable it is to have conquered dishonour, how disgraceful to have
   been conquered by dishonour.

   14. It must be said, moreover, that adultery is not pleasure, but
   mutual contempt; nor can it delight, because it kills both the soul and
   modesty. Let the soul restrain the provocations of the flesh; let it
   bridle the impulses of the body. For it has received this power, that
   the limbs should be subservient to its command; and as a lawful and
   accomplished charioteer, it should turn about the fleshly impulses when
   they lift themselves above the allowed limits of the body, by the reins
   of the heavenly precepts, lest that chariot of the body, carried away
   beyond its limits, should hurry into its own peril the charioteer
   himself as well as it. But in the midst of these things, nay, before
   these things, in opposition to disturbances and all vices, help must be
   sought for from the divine camp; for God alone, who has condescended to
   make men, is powerful also to afford sufficient help to men. I have
   composed a few words, because I did not propose to write a volume, but
   to send you an address. Look ye to the Scriptures; seek out for
   yourselves from those precepts greater illustrations of this matter.
   [4885] Beloved brethren, farewell.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4870] [Not reckoned by Erasmus as worthy of Cyprian. Pamelius thinks
   otherwise.]

   [4871] [This illustrates pp. 322 and 389, note 7.]

   [4872] ["So dear to Heaven is saintly Chastity, etc."--Milton, Comus,
   455.]

   [4873] [Holy men have generally recognised this rule as ennobling the
   estate of matrimony. See Jeremy Taylor, Holy Living, cap. ii. sec. 3.]

   [4874] [This natural law, renewed in Christ, is part of the honour
   which He has restored to womanhood; honouring His mother therein as the
   second Eve. Matt. xix. 8; Gen. ii. 24.]

   [4875] Matt. xix. 5.

   [4876] Eph. v. 28, 29.

   [4877] Lev. xx. 10.

   [4878] 1 Thess. iv. 3.

   [4879] 1 Cor. vi. 15.

   [4880] "Irrogare."

   [4881] [Tertullian, vol. iv. pp. 74, 97, etc.]

   [4882] This passage is allowed by all to be corrupt. If we were to
   punctuate differently, to insert "nisi" before "consummata," and change
   "longe est" into "non deesset," we get the following sense:  "Therefore
   we should always meditate, brethren, on chastity, as circumstances
   teach us, that it may be more easy for us. It depends on no arts; for
   what is it but perfected will, which, if it were not checked, would
   certainly not fail to arise? And it is our own will, too: therefore it
   has not to be acquired, but we have to cherish what is already our
   own."

   [4883] ["Kalendarium cujusvis excedunt." The kalendaria were tablets of
   monthly accounts, in which the monthly interest due, etc., were set
   down.  "Exceed the entire monthly income" would be better.  Tertullian
   uses the same word, "exhaust thekalendarium," rendered by our Edinburgh
   translator (vol. iv. p. 18), a "fortune." In this treatise Tertullian
   is constantly copied and quoted.]

   [4884] [Laughter, vol. ii. p. 249, and contact p. 291.]

   [4885] [Everything in antiquity breathes this spirit of "searching the
   Scriptures." Compare Hippol., p. 219, note 4, supra.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Exhortation to Repentance. [4886]

   ------------------------

   That all sins may be forgiven him who has turned to God with his whole
   heart.

   In the eighty-eighth Psalm: "If his children forsake my law, and walk
   not in my judgments, and keep not my commandments, I will visit their
   iniquities with a rod, and their sins with stripes; nevertheless my
   loving-kindness will I not scatter away from them." [4887]

   Also in Isaiah: "Thus saith the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, When thou
   shalt turn and mourn, then thou shalt be saved, and shalt know where
   thou wast." [4888]

   Also in the same place: "Woe unto you, children of desertion, saith the
   Lord! ye have made counsel not by me, and my covenant not by my Spirit,
   to add sin to sin." [4889]

   Also in Jeremiah: "Withdraw thy foot from a rough way, and thy face
   from thirst. But she said, I will be comforted, I am willing; for she
   loved strangers, and went after them." [4890]

   Also in Isaiah: "Be ye converted, because ye devise a deep and wicked
   counsel." [4891]

   Also in the same place: "I am He, I am He that blotteth out thy
   iniquities, and will not remember them; but do thou remember them, and
   let us be judged together; do thou first tell thine unrighteousnesses."
   [4892]

   Also in the same: "Seek the Lord; and when ye shall have found Him,
   call upon Him. But when He has drawn near to you, let the wicked
   forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him be
   converted to the Lord, and mercy shall be prepared for him, because He
   does not much [4893] forgive your sins." [4894]

   Also in the same: "Remember these things, O Jacob and Israel, because
   thou art my servant. I have called thee my servant; and thou, Israel,
   forget me not. Lo, I have washed away thy unrighteousness as,...and thy
   sins as a raincloud. Be converted to me, and I will redeem thee."
   [4895]

   Also in the same: "Have these things in mind, and groan. Repent, ye
   that have been seduced; be converted in heart unto me, and have in mind
   the former ages, because I am God." [4896]

   Also in the same: "For a very little season I have forsaken thee, and
   with great mercy I will pity thee. In a very little wrath I turned away
   my face from thee; in everlasting mercy I will pity thee." [4897]

   Also in the same: "Thus said the Most High, who dwelleth on high, for
   ever Holy in the holies, His name is the Lord, the Most High, resting
   in the holy places, and giving calmness of mind to the faint-hearted,
   and giving life to those that are broken-hearted: I am not angry with
   you for ever, neither will I be avenged in all things on you: for my
   Spirit shall go forth from me, and I have made all inspiration; and on
   account of a very little sin I have grieved him, and have turned away
   my face from him; and he has suffered the vile man, and has gone away
   sadly in his ways. I have seen his ways, and have healed him, and I
   have comforted him, and I have given to him the true consolation, and
   peace upon peace to those who are afar off, and to those that are
   near.  And the Lord said, I have healed them; but the unrighteous, as a
   troubled sea, are thus tossed about and cannot rest. There is no joy to
   the wicked, saith the Lord." [4898]

   Also in Jeremiah: "Shall a bride forget her adornment, or [4899] a
   virgin the girdle of her breast? But my people has forgotten my days,
   [4900] whereof there is no number." [4901]

   Also in the same: "For a decree, I will speak upon the nation or upon
   the kingdom, or I will take them away and destroy them. And if the
   nation should be converted from its evils, I will repent of the ills
   which [4902] I have thought to do unto them. And I will speak the
   decree upon the nation or the people, that I should rebuild it and
   plant it; and they will do evil before me, that they should not hearken
   to my voice, and I will repent of the good things which I spoke of
   doing to them." [4903]

   Also in the same: "Return to me, O dwelling of Israel, saith the Lord,
   and I will not harden my face upon you; because I am merciful, saith
   the Lord, and I will not be angry against you for ever." [4904]

   Also in the same: "Be converted, ye children that have departed, saith
   the Lord; because I will rule over you, and will take you one of a
   city, and two of a family, and I will bring you into Sion: and I will
   give you shepherds after my heart, and they shall feed you, feeding you
   with discipline." [4905]

   Also in the same: "Be converted, ye children who are turning, and I
   will heal your affliction." [4906]

   Also in the same: "Wash thine heart from wickedness, O Jerusalem, that
   thou mayest be healed: how long shall there be in thee thoughts of thy
   sorrows?" [4907]

   Also in the same: "Thus saith the Lord, Does not he that falleth arise?
   or he that turns away, shall he not be turned back? Because this people
   hath turned itself away by a shameless vision, and they have persisted
   in their presumption, and would not be converted." [4908]

   Also in the same: "There is no man that repenteth of his iniquity,
   saying, What have I done? The runner has failed from his course, as the
   sweating horse in his neighing." [4909]

   Also in the same: "Therefore let every one of you turn from his evil
   way, and make your desires better.  And they said, We will be
   comforted, because we will go after your [4910] inventions, and every
   one of us will do the sins which please his own heart." [4911]

   Also in the same: "Pour down as a torrent tears, day and night give
   thyself no rest, let not the pupil of thine eye be silent." [4912]

   Also in the same: "Let us search out our ways, and be turned to the
   Lord. Let us purge our hearts with our hands, and let us look unto the
   Lord who dwelleth in the heavens. We have sinned, and we have provoked
   Thee, and Thou hast not been propitiated." [4913]

   Also in the same: "And the Lord said to me in the days of Josias the
   king, Thou hast seen what the dwelling of the house, [4914] the house
   of Israel, has done to me. It has gone away upon every lofty mountain,
   and has gone under every shady [4915] tree, and has committed
   fornication there; and I said, after she had committed all these
   fornications, Return unto me, and she has not returned." [4916]

   Also in the same: "The Lord will not reject for ever; and when He has
   made low, He will have pity according to the multitude of His mercy.
   Because He will not bring low from His whole heart, neither will He
   reject the children of men." [4917]

   Also in Ezekiel: "And the righteous shall not be able to be saved in
   the day of transgression. When I shall say to the righteous, Thou shalt
   surely live; but [4918] he will trust to his own righteousness, and
   will do iniquity: all his righteousnesses shall not be remembered; in
   his iniquity which he has done, in that he shall die. And when I shall
   say to the wicked, Thou shalt surely die, and he turns himself from his
   sin, and doeth righteousness and judgment, and restoreth to the debtor
   his pledge, and giveth back his robbery, and walketh in the precepts of
   life, that he may do no iniquity, he shall surely live, and shall not
   die; none of his sins which he hath sinned shall be stirred up against
   him:  because he hath done justice and judgment, he shall live in
   them." [4919]

   Also in the same: "I am the Lord, because I bring low the high tree,
   and exalt the low tree, and dry up the green tree, and cause the dry
   tree to flourish." [4920]

   Also in the same: "And thou, son of man, say unto the house of Israel,
   Even as ye have spoken, saying, Our errors and our iniquities are in
   us, and we waste away in them, and how shall we live? Say unto them, I
   live, saith the Lord: if I will the death of a sinner, only let him
   turn from his way, and he shall live." [4921]

   Also in the same: "I the Lord have built up the ruined places, and have
   planted the wasted places." [4922]

   Also in the same: "And the wicked man, if he turn himself from all his
   iniquities that he has done, and keep all my commandments, and do
   judgment, and justice, and mercy, shall surely live, and shall not die.
   None of his sins which he has committed shall be in remembrance; in his
   righteousness which he hath done he shall live. Do I willingly desire
   the death of the unrighteous man, saith Adonai the Lord, rather than
   that he should turn him from his evil way, that he should live?" [4923]

   Also in the same: "Be ye converted, and turn you from all your
   wickedneses, and they shall not be to you for a punishment. Cast away
   from you all your iniquities which ye have wickedly committed against
   me, and make to yourselves a new heart and a new spirit; and why will
   ye die, O house of Israel? For I desire not the death of him that
   dieth, saith Adonai the Lord." [4924]

   Also in Daniel: "And after the end of the days, I Nabuchodonosor lifted
   up my eyes to heaven, and my sense returned to me, and I praised the
   Most High, and blessed the King of heaven, and praised Him that liveth
   for ever: because His power is eternal, His kingdom is for generations,
   [4925] and all who inhabit the earth are as nothing." [4926]

   Also in Micah: "Alas for me, O my soul, because truth has perished from
   the earth, and among all there is none that correcteth; all judge in
   blood. Every one treadeth down his neighbour with tribulation; they
   prepare their hands for evil." [4927]

   Also in the same: "Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, because I have
   fallen, but I shall arise:  because although I shall sit in darkness,
   the Lord will give me light:  I will bear the Lord's anger, because I
   have sinned against Him, until He justify my cause." [4928]

   Also in Zephaniah: "Come ye together and pray, O undisciplined people;
   before ye be made as a flower that passeth away, before the anger of
   the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lord's fury come upon
   you, seek ye the Lord, all ye humble ones of the earth; do judgment and
   seek justice, and seek for gentleness; and answer ye to Him that ye may
   be protected in the day of the Lord's anger." [4929]

   Also in Zechariah: "Be ye converted unto me, and I will be turned unto
   you." [4930]

   Also in Hosea: "Be thou converted, O Israel, to the Lord thy God,
   because thou art weakened by thine iniquities. Take many with you, and
   be converted to the Lord your God; worship Him, and say, Thou art
   mighty to put away our sins; that ye may not receive iniquity, but that
   ye may receive good things." [4931]

   Also in Ecclesiasticus: "Be thou turned to the Lord, and forsake thy
   sins, and exceedingly hate cursing, and know righteousness and God's
   judgments, and stand in the lot of the propitiation of the Most High:
   and go into the portion of life with the living, and those that make
   confession. Delay not in the error of the wicked. Confession perisheth
   from the dead man, as if it were nothing. Living and sound, thou shalt
   confess to the Lord, and thou shalt glory in His mercies; for great is
   the mercy of the Lord, and His propitiation unto such as turn unto
   Him." [4932]

   Also in the same: "How good is it for a true heart to show forth
   repentance! For thus shalt thou escape voluntary sin." [4933]

   Also in the Acts of the Apostles: "But Peter saith unto him, thy money
   perish with thee, because thou thinkest to be able to obtain the grace
   of God by money. Thou hast no part nor lot in this faith, for thy heart
   is not right with God.  Therefore repent of this thy wickedness, and
   pray the Lord, if haply the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.
   For I see that thou art in the bond of iniquity, and in the bitterness
   of gall." [4934]

   Also in the second Epistle of the blessed [4935] Paul to the
   Corinthians: "For the sorrow which is according to God worketh a
   stedfast repentance unto salvation, but the sorrow of the world worketh
   death." [4936]

   Also in the same place of this very matter:  "But if ye have forgiven
   anything to any one, I also forgive him; for I also forgave what I have
   forgiven for your sakes in the person of Christ, that we may not be
   circumvented by Satan, for we are not ignorant of his wiles." [4937]

   Also in the same: "But I fear lest perchance, when I come to you, God
   may again humble me among you, and I shall bewail many of those who
   have sinned before, and have not repented, for that they have committed
   fornication and lasciviousness." [4938]

   Also in the same: "I told you before, and foretell you as I sit
   present; and absent now from those who before have sinned, and to all
   others; as, if I shall come again, I will not spare." [4939]

   Also in the second to Timothy: "But shun profane novelties of words,
   for they are of much advantage to impiety. And their word creeps as a
   cancer: of whom is Hymenæus and Philetus, who have departed from the
   truth, saying that the resurrection has already happened, and have
   subverted the faith of certain ones. But the foundation of God standeth
   firm, having this seal, God knoweth them that are His. And, Every one
   who nameth the name of the Lord shall depart from all iniquity. But in
   a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also
   of wood and of clay; and some indeed for honour, and some for
   contempt.  Therefore if any one shall amend [4940] himself from these
   things, he shall be a vessel sanctified for honour, and useful for the
   Lord, prepared for every good work. Moreover, flee youthful lusts: but
   follow after righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call
   upon the Lord from a pure heart. But avoid questions that are foolish
   and without learning, knowing that they beget strifes.  And the servant
   of the Lord ought not to strive; but to be gentle, docile to all men,
   patient with modesty, correcting those who resist, lest at any time God
   may give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth, and
   recover themselves from the snares of the devil, by whom they are held
   captive at his will." [4941]

   Also in the Apocalypse: "Remember whence thou hast fallen, and repent;
   but if not, I will come to thee quickly, and remove thy candlestick out
   of its place." [4942]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4886] [Almost wholly made up of Scripture, and useful in any age to
   all Christians. Whatever its origin, it breathes a truly primitive
   spirit. Compare Tertullian, vol. iii. p. 657.]

   [4887] Ps. lxxxix. 30.

   [4888] Isa. xxx. 15, LXX.

   [4889] Isa. xxx. 1, LXX.

   [4890] Jer. ii. 25, LXX.

   [4891] Isa. xxxi. 6, LXX.

   [4892] Isa. xliii. 25, LXX.

   [4893] Non multum remittit--probably a misprint for "permultum."

   [4894] Isa. lv. 6, 7, LXX.

   [4895] Isa. xliv. 21, 22, LXX.

   [4896] Isa. xlvi. 8, LXX.

   [4897] Isa. liv. 7, 8, LXX.

   [4898] Isa. lvii. 15 et seq., LXX.

   [4899] It is taken for granted that the "ut" of the original is a
   misprint for "aut."

   [4900] Otherwise, "has forgotten me days without number."

   [4901] Jer. ii. 32, LXX.

   [4902] Here also the emendation of "quæ" for "quod" is obviously
   necessary.

   [4903] Jer. xviii. 7.

   [4904] Jer. iii. 12, LXX.

   [4905] Jer. iii. 14, LXX.

   [4906] Jer. iii. 22, LXX.

   [4907] Jer. iv. 14, LXX.

   [4908] Jer. viii. 4, LXX.

   [4909] Jer. viii. 6, LXX.

   [4910] Otherwise "our."

   [4911] Jer. xviii. 12, LXX.

   [4912] Lam. ii. 18, LXX.

   [4913] Lam. iii. 40.

   [4914] There is evident confusion here, and no place can be found for
   the word "vocem."

   [4915] It has been taken for granted that "numerosum" is a misprint for
   "nemorosum."

   [4916] Jer. iii. 6, LXX.

   [4917] Lam. iii. 31, LXX.

   [4918] Trombellius suggests "if" instead of "but."

   [4919] Ezek. xxxii. 12, etc., LXX.

   [4920] Ezek. xvii. 24, LXX.

   [4921] Ezek. xxxiii. 10, LXX.

   [4922] Ezek. xxxvi. 36, LXX.

   [4923] Ezek. xviii. 21, LXX.

   [4924] Ezek. xviii. 30, LXX.

   [4925] "In generatione."

   [4926] Dan. iv. 34.

   [4927] Mic. vii. 1, 2, 3, LXX.

   [4928] Mic. vii. 8, LXX.

   [4929] Zeph. ii. 1, LXX.

   [4930] Zech. i. 3.

   [4931] Hos. xiv. 2.

   [4932] Ecclus. xvii. 26.

   [4933] Ecclus xx. 3.

   [4934] Acts viii. 20, etc.

   [4935] The original has only "ben," which Trombellius reasonably
   assumes to be meant for "benedicti."

   [4936] 2 Cor. vii. 10.

   [4937] 2 Cor. ii. 10.

   [4938] 2 Cor. xii. 21.

   [4939] 2 Cor. xiii. 2.

   [4940] "Emendaverit," probably a mistake for "emundaverit," "shall
   purge," as in the Vulg.; scil. ekkathare.

   [4941] 2 Tim. ii. 16. [On true penitence see Epistle xxv. p. 304
   supra.]

   [4942] Rev. ii. 5. [This selection of texts seems made on the same
   principle which dictated the compilation of texts against the Jews: a
   breviarium, the author calls it,--quædam utilia collecta et
   digesta,--to be read with readiness, and frequently referred to.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Elucidations.

   ------------------------

   I.

   (Maintained by consent, and caressed by excuses, p. 557.)

   The severer discipline of early Christianity must not be discarded by
   those who claim it for the canon of Scripture; for modes of baptism,
   confirmation, and other rites; for Church polity, in short; and for the
   Christian year.  Let us note that the whole spirit of antiquity is
   opposed to worldliness. It reflects the precept, "Be not conformed to
   this world," and in nothing more emphatically than in hostility to
   theatrical amusements, which in our days are re-asserting the deadly
   influence over Christians which Cyprian and Tertullian and other
   Fathers so solemnly denounced. If they were "maintained by consent, and
   caressed by excuses," even in the martyr-age, no wonder that in our
   Laodicean period they baffle all exertions of faithful watchmen, who
   enforce the baptismal vow against "pomps and vanities," always
   understood of theatrical shows, and hence part of that "world, the
   flesh, and the devil" which Christians have renounced.

   II.

   (Now is the axe laid to the root, p. 586.)

   Matt. iii. 10. "Securis ad radicem arboris posita est," says Cyprian,
   quoting the Old Latin, with which the Vulgate substantially agrees.
   [4943] A very diligent biblical scholar directs attention to the vulgar
   abuse of this saying, [4944] which turns upon a confusion of the active
   verb to lay, with the neuter verb to lie. [4945] It is quoted as if it
   read, Lay the axe to the root, and is "interpreted, popularly, as of
   felling a tree, an incumbrance or a nuisance....Hence it often makes
   radical reformers in Church and State, and becomes the motto of many a
   reckless leader whose way has been to teach, not upward by elevating
   the ignoble, but downward by sinking the elevated....There is something
   similar in Latin:  jacio to hurl; and jaceo, to lie, recline, or remain
   at rest. Beza follows the Vulgate (posita est); but the original is
   clear,--keitai, [4946] is laid, or lieth....It means, The axe is ready;
   it lieth near the root, in mercy and in menace....The long-suffering of
   God waiteth as in the days of Noah...waiteth, i.e., for good fruit."

   Compare Luke xiii. 9: "If it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after
   that thou shalt cut it down." Such is the argument of Cyprian, in view
   of the approaching "end of time."

   III.

   (General Note.)

   Let me here call attention to the mischievous use of words common among
   modern Latins, even the best of them. Thus, Pellicia [4947] mentions
   Cyprian as referring his synodical judgment to "the supreme chair of
   the Church of Rome." No need to say that his reference proves nothing
   of the kind. "Supremacy," indeed! Consult Bossuet and the Gallicans on
   that point, even after Trent. The case cited is evidence of the very
   reverse. Cyprian and his Carthaginian colleagues wished, also, the
   conspicuous co-operation of their Italian brethren; and so he writes to
   "Cornelius, our colleague," who, "with very many comprovincial bishops,
   having held a council, concurred in the same opinion." It is an
   instance of fraternal concurrence on grounds of entire equality; and
   Cyprian's courteous invitation to his "colleague" Cornelius and his
   comprovincials to co-operate, is a striking illustration of the maxim,
   "Totus apellandus sit orbis, ubi totum orbem causa spectat." Compare
   St. Basil's letters to the Western bishops, in which he reminds them
   that the Gospel came to them from the East. This is a sort of primacy
   recognised by St. Paul himself, [4948] as it was afterwards, when
   Jerusalem was recognised as "the mother of all the churches" [4949] by
   a general council, writing to Damasus, bishop of Rome, himself.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4943] It has arborum, however, instead of the singular.

   [4944] Theopneuston, by Samuel Hanson Cox, D.D., New York, 1842.

   [4945] Note, an extraordinary instance, Childe Harold, Canto iv. st.
   180.

   [4946] Lexicographers give keimai = jaceo.

   [4947] Polity, etc., p. 416 (translation). This valuable work,
   translated and edited by the Rev. J. C. Bellett, M.A. (London, 1883),
   is useful as to mediæval usages, and as supplementing Bingham. But the
   learned editor has not been sufficiently prudent in noting his author's
   perpetual misconceptions of antiquity.

   [4948] 1 Cor. xiv. 36.

   [4949] Theodoret, book v. cap. ix. a.d. 382. The bishops say "last
   year" (a.d. 381), speaking of the council in session.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

  Caius
     __________________________________________________________________

   Caius.

   [Translated by the Rev. S. D. F. Salmond, M.A.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Introductory Notice

   to

   Caius, Presbyter of Rome.

   ------------------------

   [a.d. 180-217.] During the episcopate of Zephyrinus, Caius, one of his
   presbyters, acquired much credit by his refutation of Proclus, a
   Montanist. He became known as an eloquent and erudite doctor, and to
   him has often been ascribed the Philosophumena of Hippolytus, and also
   The Labyrinth. He wrote in Greek, and finally seems to have been
   promoted to an episcopal See, possibly among the Easterns. [4950] To
   him also has been ascribed the celebrated "Muratorian Canon," which is
   therefore given in this volume, with other fragments less dubiously
   associated with his name. He has been supposed by some to have been a
   pupil of Irenæus, but of this there is no conclusive evidence. If his
   reputation suffers somewhat from his supposed rejection of the
   Apocalypse, it is apologized for by Wordsworth, in a paragraph that
   deserves to be quoted entire:  "Let it be remembered that the church of
   Rome was not eminent for learning at that time. It was induced, by fear
   of erroneous consequences, to surrender another canonical book,--the
   Epistle to the Hebrews. The learning of the Church was then mainly in
   the East. It was by the influence of the East, in the West, that the
   church of Rome was enabled to recover that epistle. It was also the
   influence of the Apocalyptic churches of Asia that preserved the
   Apocalypse as an inspired work of St. John to the church of Rome." By
   the deference with which the author of the Refutation speaks of the
   Apocalypse, we are able, among other evidences, to decide that it is
   not the work of Caius.

   In an interesting chapter of his Hippolytus, Bishop Wordsworth
   considers the possibility of the authorship of that work as his, and
   discusses it with ability and learning. Nearly all that is known or
   conjectured concerning Caius is there condensed and elucidated. But
   Lardner devotes a yet more learned chapter to him; and to that the
   inquirer is referred, as a sufficient elucidation of all that was known
   or conjectured about him before the present century. He is quoted by
   Eusebius; [4951] and the traveller is reminded, when he visits the
   gorgeous Church of St. Paul on the Ostian Road, that so early an author
   as Caius may be cited as evidence that it probably stands very near the
   spot where St. Paul fulfilled his prophecy, "I am now ready to be
   offered, and the time of my departure is at hand." We can only
   conjecture the time of his birth by the age he must have attained in
   the time of Zephyrinus; but of his death, the secret is with the Master
   in whom he believed, as we may trust, until he fell asleep.

   Here follows, from the Edinburgh series, the learned editor's
   Introductory Notice:--

   Eusebius states that Caius lived in the time of Zephyrinus. [4952] He
   speaks of him as a member of the Catholic Church, [4953] and as being
   most learned. And he mentions that a dialogue of his was extant in his
   time, in which he argued with Proclus, the leader of the Cataphrygian
   heresy; and that Caius in this dialogue spoke of only thirteen epistles
   of the Apostle Paul, "not counting the Epistle to the Hebrews with the
   rest." [4954]

   Eusebius mentions no other work of Caius. He makes extracts from a work
   against the heresy of Artemon in the fifth book of his Ecclesiastical
   History, but he states distinctly that the work was anonymous. He
   evidently did not know who was the author. Theodoret and Nicephorus
   affirm that the work from which Eusebius made these extracts bore the
   title of The Little Labyrinth. Photius has the following notice of
   Caius:  "Read the work of Josephus on the universe, bearing in some
   manuscripts the inscription On the Cause of the Universe, and in
   others, On the Substance of the Universe....But I found that this
   treatise is not the work of Josephus, but of one Gaius a presbyter, who
   lived in Rome, who they say composed The Labyrinth also, and whose
   dialogue with Proclus, the champion of the Montanistic heresy, is in
   circulation....They say also that he composed another treatise
   specially directed against the heresy of Artemon." [4955]   Photius
   here ascribes four works to Caius: 1. On the Universe; 2. The
   Labyrinth; 3. The Dialogue between himself and Proclus; 4. The Treatise
   against the Heresy of Artemon. He does not say that he read any of them
   but the first. This treatise is now assigned to Hippolytus. The
   information of Photius in regard to the other three, derived as it is
   from the statements of others, cannot be trusted.

   ------------------------

   Note by the American Editor.

   It is to be observed that the Fragment of Muratori proves that the
   Apocalypse was received in the church at Rome in the times of Pius,
   a.d. 160. It is quoted in Hermas freely.  Also, see the Epistle of
   Roman clergy to Cyprian (p. 303, note 5, supra), about a.d. 250. But
   the Fragment aforesaid is the earliest direct evidence on the subject.
   Note, that its author says, "We receive the Apocalypse," etc. "Some
   amongst us will not have," etc. (see p. 602, infra). Thus, the
   comprovincials have a voice, as in the cases cited by Hippolytus.  See
   (pp. 157, 159, supra) Elucidations VI. and XI. The Bishop of Rome
   seems, by this Fragment, to have received the Apocalypse of Peter
   (Eusebius, H. E., book iii. cap. 25), but it was thrown out as spurious
   by the Church nevertheless.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4950] The ingenious conjecture of Wordsworth, who surmises that kai
   ethnon episkopon, in Photius, should be read kai heothinon.
   Hippolytus, p. 30. Another conjecture is 'Athenon. For the originals of
   these Fragments and learned notes, see Routh, Reliquæ Sacræ, ii. p.
   127.

   [4951] Eusebius quotes him in several places (book ii. cap. xxv., book
   iii. capp. xxviii. and xxxi.), and cites him in proof that St. Peter
   suffered on the Vatican, and St. Paul on the Via Ostiensis. See
   Lardner, Credib., vol. ii. pp. 394, 410.

   [4952] Hist. Eccl., ii. 25, vi. 20.

   [4953] ekklesiastikos aner.

   [4954] Hist. Eccl., vi. 20.

   [4955] Cod. 48.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
