# source: Fathers/English/ANF/Volume VI.   The Fathers of the Third Century
# series: ANF
# volume: Volume VI.
# father: methodius
# work: Oration Concerning Simeon and Anna
# latin_match_candidate: (none)
# extracted: 2026-09-01
# note: Public-domain Schaff English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
Oration Concerning Simeon and Anna

   On the Day that They Met in the Temple. [2986]

   ------------------------

   I. Although I have before, as briefly as possible, in my dialogue on
   chastity, sufficiently laid the foundations, as it were, for a
   discourse on virginity, yet to-day the season has brought forward the
   entire subject of the glory of virginity, and its incorruptible crown,
   for the delightful consideration of the Church's foster-children. For
   to-day the council chamber of the divine oracles is opened wide, and
   the signs prefiguring this glorious day, with its effects and issues,
   are by the sacred preachers read over to the assembled Church. Today
   the accomplishment of that ancient and true counsel is, in fact and
   deed, gloriously manifested to the world. Today, without any covering,
   [2987] and with unveiled face, we see, as in a mirror, the glory of the
   Lord, and the majesty of the divine ark itself. To-day, the most holy
   assembly, bearing upon its shoulders the heavenly joy that was for
   generations expected, imparts it to the race of man. "Old things are
   passed away" [2988] --things new burst forth into flowers, and such as
   fade not away. No longer does the stern decree of the law bear sway,
   but the grace of the Lord reigneth, drawing all men to itself by saving
   long-suffering. No second time is an Uzziah [2989] invisibly punished,
   for daring to touch what may not be touched; for God Himself invites,
   and who will stand hesitating with fear? He says: "Come unto Me, all ye
   that labour and are heavy laden." [2990] Who, then, will not run to
   Him? Let no Jew contradict the truth, looking at the type which went
   before the house of Obededom. [2991] The Lord has "manifestly come to
   His own." [2992] And sitting on a living and not inanimate ark, as upon
   the mercy-seat, He comes forth in solemn procession upon the earth. The
   publican, when he touches this ark, comes away just; the harlot, when
   she approaches this, is remoulded, as it were, and becomes chaste; the
   leper, when he touches this, is restored whole without pain. It
   repulses none; it shrinks from none; it imparts the gifts of healing,
   without itself contracting any disease; for the Lord, who loves and
   cares for man, in it makes His resting-place. These are the gifts of
   this new grace. This is that new and strange thing that has happened
   under the sun [2993] --a thing that never had place before, nor will
   have place again. That which God of His compassion toward us
   foreordained has come to pass, He hath given it fulfilment because of
   that love for man which is so becoming to Him. With good right,
   therefore, has the sacred trumpet sounded, "Old things are passed away,
   behold all things are become new." [2994] And what shall I conceive,
   what shall I speak worthy of this day? I am struggling to reach the
   inaccessible, for the remembrance of this holy virgin far transcends
   all words of mine. Wherefore, since the greatness of the panegyric
   required completely puts to shame our limited powers, let us betake
   ourselves to that hymn which is not beyond our faculties, and boasting
   in our own [2995] unalterable defeat, let us join the rejoicing chorus
   of Christ's flock, who are keeping holy-day. And do you, my divine and
   saintly auditors, keep strict silence, in order that through the narrow
   channel of ears, as into the harbour of the understanding, the vessel
   freighted with truth may peacefully sail. We keep festival, not
   according to the vain customs of the Greek mythology; we keep a feast
   which brings with it no ridiculous or frenzied banqueting [2996] of the
   gods, but which teaches us the wondrous condescension to us men of the
   awful glory of Him who is God over all. [2997]

   II. Come, therefore, Isaiah, most solemn of preachers and greatest of
   prophets, wisely unfold to the Church the mysteries of the congregation
   in glory, and incite our excellent guests abundantly, to satiate
   themselves with enduring dainties, in order that, placing the reality
   which we possess over against that mirror of thine, truthful prophet as
   thou art, thou mayest joyfully clap thine hands at the issue of thy
   predictions. It came to pass, he says, "in the year in which king
   Uzziah died, I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up;
   and the house was full of His glory. And the seraphim stood round about
   him: each one had six wings. And one cried unto another, and said,
   Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of His
   glory. And the posts of the door were moved at the voice of him that
   cried, and the house was filled with smoke. And I said, Woe is me! I am
   pricked to the heart, for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in
   the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the
   King, the Lord of hosts. And one of the seraphim was sent unto me,
   having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from
   off the altar. And he touched my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched
   thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin is purged. Also
   I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will
   go unto this people? Then said I, Here am I; send me. And He said, Go,
   and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye
   indeed, but perceive not." [2998] These are the proclamations made
   beforehand by the prophet through the Spirit. Do thou, dearly beloved,
   consider the force of these words. So shalt thou understand the issue
   of these sacramental [2999] symbols, and know both what and how great
   this assembling together of ourselves is. And since the prophet has
   before spoken of this miracle, come thou, and with the greatest ardour
   and exultation, and alacrity of heart, together with the keenest
   sagacity of thine intelligence, and therewith approach Bethlehem the
   renowned, and place before thy mind an image clear and distinct,
   comparing the prophecy with the actual issue of events. Thou wilt not
   stand in need of many words to come to a knowledge of the matter; only
   fix thine eyes on the things which are taking place there. "All things
   truly are plain to them that understand, and right to them that find
   knowledge." [3000] For, behold, as a throne high and lifted up by the
   glory of Him that fashioned it, the virgin-mother is there made ready,
   and that most evidently for the King, the Lord of hosts. Upon this,
   consider the Lord now coming unto thee in sinful flesh. Upon this
   virginal throne, I say, worship Him who now comes to thee by this new
   and ever-adorable way. Look around thee with the eye of faith, and thou
   wilt find around Him, as by the ordinance of their courses, [3001] the
   royal and priestly company of the seraphim. These, as His bodyguard,
   are ever wont to attend the presence of their king. Whence also in this
   place they are not only said to hymn with their praises the divine
   substance of the divine unity, but also the glory to be adored by all
   of that one of the sacred Trinity, which now, by the appearance of God
   in the flesh, hath even lighted upon earth. They say: "The whole earth
   is full of His glory." For we believe that, together with the Son, who
   was made man for our sakes, according to the good pleasure of His will,
   [3002] was also present the Father, who is inseparable from Him as to
   His divine nature, anal also the Spirit, who is of one and the same
   essence with Him. [3003] For, as says Paul, the interpreter of the
   divine oracle, [3004] "God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
   Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them." [3005] He thus shows
   that the Father was in the Son, because that one and the same will
   worked in them.

   III. Do thou, therefore, O lover of this festival, when thou hast
   considered well the glorious mysteries of Bethlehem, which were brought
   to pass for thy sake, gladly join thyself to the heavenly host, which
   is celebrating magnificently thy salvation. [3006] As once David did
   before the ark, so do thou, before this virginal throne, joyfully lead
   the dance. Hymn with gladsome song the Lord, who is always and
   everywhere present, and Him who from Teman, [3007] as says the prophet,
   hath thought fit to appear, and that in the flesh, to the race of men.
   Say, with Moses, "He is my God, and I will glorify Him; my father's
   God, and I will exalt Him." [3008] Then, after thine hymn of
   thanksgiving, we shall usefully inquire what cause aroused the King of
   Glory to appear in Bethlehem. His compassion for us compelled Him, who
   cannot be compelled, to be born in a human body at Bethlehem. But what
   necessity was there that He, when a suckling infant, [3009] that He
   who, though both in time, was not limited by time, that He, who though
   wrapped in swaddling clothes, was not by them held fast, what necessity
   was there that He should be an exile and a stranger from His country?
   Should you, forsooth, wish to know this, ye congregation most holy, and
   upon whom the Spirit of God hath breathed, listen to Moses proclaiming
   plainly to the people, stimulating them, as it were, to the knowledge
   of this extraordinary nativity, and saying, "Every male that openeth
   the womb, shall be called holy to the Lord." [3010] O wondrous
   circumstance! "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
   knowledge of God!" [3011] It became indeed the Lord of the law and the
   prophets to do all things in accordance with His own law, and not to
   make void the law, but to fulfil it, and rather to connect with the
   fulfilment of the law the beginning of His grace. Therefore it is that
   the mother, who was superior to the law, submits to the law. And she,
   the holy and undefiled one, observes that time of forty days that was
   appointed for the unclean. And He who makes us free from the law,
   became subject to the law; and there is offered for Him, who hath
   sanctified us, a pair of clean birds, [3012] in testimony of those who
   approach clean and blameless. Now that that parturition was unpolluted,
   and stood not in need of expiatory victims, Isaiah is our witness, who
   proclaims distinctly to the whole earth under the sun: "Before she
   travailed," he says, "she brought forth; before her pains came, she
   escaped, and brought forth a man-child." [3013] Who hath heard such a
   thing? Who hath seen such things? The must holy virgin mother,
   therefore, escaped entirely the manner of women even before she brought
   forth: doubtless, in order that the Holy Spirit, betrothing her unto
   Himself, and sanctifying her, she might conceive without intercourse
   with man. She hath brought forth her first-born Son, even the
   only-begotten Son of God, Him, I say, who in the heavens above shone
   forth as the only-begotten, without mother, from out His Father's
   substance, and preserved the virginity of His natural unity undivided
   and inseparable; and who on earth, in the virgin's nuptial chamber,
   joined to Himself the nature of Adam, like a bridegroom, by an
   inalienable union, and preserved His mother's purity uncorrupt and
   uninjured--Him, in short, who in heaven was begotten without
   corruption, and on earth brought forth in a manner quite unspeakable.
   But to return to our subject.

   IV. Therefore the prophet brought the virgin from Nazareth, in order
   that she might give birth at Bethlehem to her salvation-bestowing
   child, and brought her back again to Nazareth, in order to make
   manifest to the world the hope of life. Hence it was that the ark of
   God removed from the inn at Bethlehem, for there He paid to the law
   that debt of the forty days, due not to justice but to grace, and
   rested upon the mountains of Sion, and receiving into His pure bosom as
   upon a lofty throne, and one transcending the nature of man, the
   Monarch of all, [3014] she presented Him there to God the Father, as
   the joint-partner of His throne and inseparable from His nature,
   together with that pure and undefiled flesh which he had of her
   substance assumed. The holy mother goes up to the temple to exhibit to
   the law a new and strange wonder, even that child long expected, who
   opened the virgin's womb, and yet did not burst the barriers of
   virginity; that child, superior to the law, who yet fulfilled the law;
   that child that was at once before the law, and yet after it; that
   child, in short, who was of her incarnate beyond the law of nature.
   [3015] For in other cases every womb being first opened by connection
   with a man, and, being impregnated by his seed, receives the beginning
   of conception, and by the pangs which make perfect parturition, doth at
   length bring forth to light its offspring endowed with reason, and with
   its nature consistent, in accordance with the wise provision of God its
   Creator. For God said, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the
   earth." But the womb of this virgin, without being opened before, or
   being impregnated with seed, gave birth to an offspring that
   transcended nature, while at the same time it was cognate to it, and
   that without detriment to the indivisible unity, so that the miracle
   was the more stupendous, the prerogative of virginity likewise
   remaining intact. She goes up, therefore to the temple, she who was
   more exalted than the temple, clothed with a double glory--the glory, I
   say, of undefiled virginity, and that of ineffable fecundity, the
   benediction of the law, and the sanctification of grace. Wherefore he
   says who saw it: "And the whole house was full of His glory, and the
   seraphim stood round about him; and one cried unto another, and said,
   Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of His
   glory." [3016] As also the blessed prophet Habakkuk has charmingly
   sung, saying, "In the midst of two living creatures thou shalt be
   known: as the years draw nigh thou shalt be recognised--when the time
   is come thou shalt be shown forth." [3017] See, I pray you, the
   exceeding accuracy of the Spirit. He speaks of knowledge, recognition,
   showing forth. As to the first of these: "In the midst of two living
   creatures thou shalt be known," [3018] he refers to that overshadowing
   of the divine glory which, in the time of the law, rested in the Holy
   of holies upon the covering of the ark, between the typical cherubim,
   as He says to Moses, "There will I be known to thee." [3019] But He
   refers likewise to that concourse of angels, which hath now come to
   meet us, by the divine and ever adorable manifestation of the Saviour
   Himself in the flesh, although He in His very nature cannot be beheld
   by us, as Isaiah has even before declared. But when He says, "As the
   years draw nigh, thou shalt be recognised," He means, as has been said
   before, that glorious recognition of our Saviour, God in the flesh, who
   is otherwise invisible to mortal eye; as somewhere Paul, that great
   interpreter of sacred mysteries, says: "But when the fulness of the
   time was come, God sent forth His Son, made of a woman, made under the
   law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the
   adoption of sons." [3020] And then, as to that which is subjoined,
   "When the time is come, Thou shalt be shown forth," what exposition
   doth this require, if a man diligently direct the eye of his mind to
   the festival which we are now celebrating? "For then shalt Thou be
   shown forth," He says, "as upon a kingly charger, by Thy pure and
   chaste mother, in the temple, and that in the grace and beauty of the
   flesh assumed by Thee." All these things the prophet, summing up for
   the sake of greater clearness, exclaims in brief: "The Lord is in His
   holy temple;" [3021] "Fear before Him all the earth." [3022]

   V. Tremendous, verily, is the mystery connected with thee, O virgin
   mother, thou spiritual throne, glorified and made worthy of God. [3023]
   Thou hast brought forth, before the eyes of those in heaven and earth,
   a pre-eminent wonder. And it is a proof of this, and an irrefragable
   argument, that at the novelty of thy supernatural child-bearing, the
   angels sang on earth, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
   good-will towards men," [3024] by their threefold song bringing in a
   threefold holiness. [3025] Blessed art thou among the generations of
   women, O thou of God most blessed, for by thee the earth has been
   filled with that divine glory of God; as in the Psalms it is sung:
   "Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, and the whole earth shall be filled
   with His glory. Amen. Amen." [3026] And the posts of the door, says the
   prophet, moved at the voice of him that cried, by which is signified
   the veil of the temple drawn before the ark of the covenant, which
   typified thee, that the truth might be laid open to me, and also that I
   might be taught, by the types and figures which went before, to
   approach with reverence and trembling to do honour to the sacred
   mystery which is connected with thee; and that by means of this prior
   shadow-painting of the law I might be restrained from boldly and
   irreverently contemplating with fixed gaze Him who, in His
   incomprehensibility, is seated far above all. [3027] For if to the ark,
   which was the image and type of thy sanctity, such honour was paid of
   God that to no one but to the priestly order only was the access to it
   open, or ingress allowed to behold it, the veil separating it off, and
   keeping the vestibule as that of a queen, what, and what sort of
   veneration is due to thee from us who are of creation the least, to
   thee who art indeed a queen; to thee, the living ark of God, the
   Lawgiver; to thee, the heaven that contains Him who can be contained of
   none? For since thou, O holy virgin, [3028] hast dawned as a bright day
   upon the world and hast brought forth the Sun of Righteousness, that
   hateful horror of darkness has been chased away; the power of the
   tyrant has been broken, death hath been destroyed, hell swallowed up,
   and all enmity dissolved before the face of peace; noxious diseases
   depart now that salvation looks forth; and the whole universe has been
   filled with the pure and clear light of truth. To which things Solomon
   alludes in the Book of Canticles, and begins thus: "My beloved is mine,
   and I am his; he feedeth among the lilies until the day break, and the
   shadows flee away." [3029] Since then, the God of gods hath appeared in
   Sion, and the splendour of His beauty hath appeared in Jerusalem; and
   "a light has sprung up for the righteous, and joy for those who are
   true of heart." [3030] According to the blessed David, the Perfecter
   and Lord of the perfected [3031] hath, by the Holy Spirit, called the
   teacher and minister of the law to minister and testify of those things
   which were done.

   VI. Hence the aged Simeon, putting off the weakness of the flesh, and
   putting on the strength of hope, in the face of the law hastened to
   receive the Minister of the law, the Teacher [3032] with authority, the
   God of Abraham, the Protector of Isaac, the Holy One of Israel, the
   Instructor of Moses; Him, I say, who promised to show him His divine
   incarnation, as it were His hinder parts; [3033] Him who, in the midst
   of poverty, was rich; Him who in infancy was before the ages; Him who,
   though seen, was invisible; Him who in comprehension was
   incomprehensible; Him who, though in littleness, yet surpassed all
   magnitude--at one and the same time in the temple and in the highest
   heavens--on a royal throne, and on the chariot of the cherubim Him who
   is both above and below continuously; Him who is in the form of a
   servant, and in the form of God the Father; a subject, and yet King of
   all. He was entirely given up to desire, to hope, to joy; he was no
   longer his own, but His who had been looked for. The Holy Spirit had
   announced to him the joyful tidings, and before he reached the temple,
   carried aloft by the eyes of his understanding, as if even now he
   possessed what he had longed for, he exulted with joy. Being thus led
   on, and in his haste treading the air with his steps, he reaches the
   shrine hitherto held sacred; but, not heeding the temple, he stretches
   out his holy arms to the Ruler of the temple, chanting forth in song
   such strains as become the joyous occasion: I long for Thee, O Lord God
   of my fathers, and Lord of mercy, who hast deigned, of Thine own glory
   and goodness, which provides for all, of Thy gracious condescension,
   with which Thou inclinest towards us, as a Mediator bringing peace, to
   establish harmony between earth and heaven. I seek Thee, the Great
   Author of all. With longing I expect Thee who, with Thy word, embracest
   all things. I wait for Thee, the Lord of life and death. For Thee I
   look, the Giver of the law, and the Successor of the law. I hunger for
   Thee, who quickenest the dead; I thirst for Thee, who refreshest the
   weary; I desire Thee, the Creator and Redeemer of the world. [3034]
   Thou art our God, and Thee we adore; Thou art our holy Temple, and in
   Thee we pray; Thou art our Lawgiver, and Thee we obey; Thou art God of
   all things the First. Before Thee was no other god begotten of God the
   Father; neither after Thee shall there be any other son consubstantial
   and of one glory with the Father. And to know Thee is perfect
   righteousness, and to know Thy power is the root of immortality. [3035]
   Thou art He who, for our salvation, was made the head stone of the
   corner, precious and honourable, declared before to Sion. [3036] For
   all things are placed under Thee as their Cause and Author, as He who
   brought all things into being out of nothing, and gave to what was
   unstable a firm coherence; as the connecting Band and Preserver of that
   which has been brought into being; as the Framer of things by nature
   different; as He who, with wise and steady hand, holds the helm of the
   universe; as the very Principle of all good order; as the irrefragable
   Bond of concord and peace. For in Thee we live, and move, and have our
   being. [3037] Wherefore, O Lord my God, I will glorify Thee, I will
   praise Thy name; for Thou hast done wonderful things; Thy counsels of
   old are faithfulness and truth; Thou art clothed with majesty and
   honour. [3038] For what is more splendid for a king than a purple robe
   embroidered around with flowers, and a shining diadem? Or what for God,
   who delights in man, is more magnificent than this merciful assumption
   of the manhood, illuminating with its resplendent rays those who sit in
   darkness and the shadow of death? [3039] Fitly did that temporal king
   and Thy servant once sing of Thee as the King Eternal, saying, Thou art
   fairer than the children of men, who amongst men art very God and man.
   [3040] For Thou hast girt, by Thy incarnation, Thy loins with
   righteousness, and anointed Thy veins with faithfulness, who Thyself
   art very righteousness and truth, the joy and exultation of all. [3041]
   Therefore rejoice with me this day, ye heavens, for the Lord hath
   showed mercy to His people. Yea, let the clouds drop the dew of
   righteousness upon the world; let the foundations of the earth sound a
   trumpet-blast to those in Hades, for the resurrection of them that
   sleep is come. [3042] Let the earth also cause compassion to spring up
   to its inhabitants; for I am filled with comfort; I am exceeding joyful
   since I have seen Thee, the Saviour of men. [3043]

   VII. While the old man was thus exultant, and rejoicing with exceeding
   great and holy joy, that which had before been spoken of in a figure by
   the prophet Isaiah, the holy mother of God now manifestly fulfilled.
   For taking, as from a pure and undefiled altar, that coal living and
   ineffable, with man's flesh invested, in the embrace of her sacred
   hands, as it were with the tongs, she held Him out to that just one,
   addressing and exhorting him, as it seems to me, in words to this
   effect: Receive, O reverend senior, thou of priests the most excellent,
   receive the Lord, and reap the full fruition of that hope of thine
   which is not left widowed and desolate. Receive, thou of men the most
   illustrious, the unfailing treasure, and those riches which can never
   be taken away. Take to thine embrace, O thou of men most wise, that
   unspeakable might, that unsearchable power, which can alone support
   thee. Embrace, thou minister of the temple, the Greatness infinite, and
   the Strength incomparable. Fold thyself around Him who is the very life
   itself, and live, O thou of men most venerable. Cling closely to
   incorruption and be renewed, O thou of men most righteous. Not too bold
   is the attempt; shrink not from it then, O thou of men most holy.
   Satiate thyself with Him thou hast longed for, and take thy delight in
   Him who has been given, or rather who gives Himself to thee, O thou of
   men most divine. Joyfully draw thy light, O thou of men most pious,
   from the Sun of Righteousness, that gleams around thee through the
   unsullied mirror of the flesh. Fear not His gentleness, nor let His
   clemency terrify thee, O thou of men most blessed. Be not afraid of His
   lenity, nor shrink from His kindness, O thou of men most modest. Join
   thyself to Him with alacrity, and delay not to obey Him. That which is
   spoken to thee, and held out to thee, savours not of over-boldness. Be
   not then reluctant, O thou of men the most decorous. The flame of the
   grace of my Lord does not consume, but illuminates thee, O thou of men
   most just. [3044] Let the bush which set forth me in type, with respect
   to the verity of that fire which yet had no subsistence, teach thee
   this, O thou who art in the law the best instructed. [3045] Let that
   furnace which was as it were a breeze distilling dew persuade thee, O
   master, of the dispensation of this mystery. Then, beside all this, let
   my womb be a proof to thee, in which He was contained, who in nought
   else was ever contained, of the substance of which the incarnate Word
   yet deigned to become incarnate. The blast [3046] of the trumpet does
   not now terrify those who approach, nor a second time does the mountain
   all on smoke cause terror to those who draw nigh, nor indeed does the
   law punish relentlessly [3047] those who would boldly touch. What is
   here present speaks of love to man; what is here apparent, of the
   Divine condescension. Thankfully, then, receive the God who comes to
   thee, for He shall take away thine iniquities, and thoroughly purge thy
   sins. In thee, let the cleansing of the world first, as in type, have
   place. In thee, and by thee, let that justification which is of grace
   become known beforehand to the Gentiles. Thou art worthy of the
   quickening first-fruits. Thou hast made good use of the law. Use grace
   henceforth. With the letter thou hast grown weary; in the spirit be
   renewed. Put off that which is old, and clothe thyself with that which
   is new. For of these matters I think not that thou art ignorant.

   VIII. Upon all this that righteous man, waxing bold and yielding to the
   exhortation of the mother of God, who is the handmaid of God in regard
   to the things which pertain to men, received into his aged arms Him who
   in infancy was yet the Ancient of days, and blessed God, and said,
   "Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy
   word: for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast prepared
   before the face of all people; a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the
   glory of Thy people Israel." [3048] I have received from Thee a joy
   unmixed with pain. Do thou, O Lord, receive me rejoicing, and singing
   of Thy mercy and compassion. Thou hast given unto me this joy of heart.
   I render unto Thee with gladness my tribute of thanksgiving. I have
   known the power of the love of God. Since, for my sake, God of Thee
   begotten, in a manner ineffable, and without corruption, has become
   man. I have known the inexplicable greatness of Thy love and care for
   us, for Thou hast sent forth Thine own bowels to come to our
   deliverance. Now, at length, I understand what I had from Solomon
   learned: "Strong as death is love: for by it shall the sting of death
   be done away, by it shall the dead see life, by it shall even death
   learn what death is, being made to cease from that dominion which over
   us he exercised. By it, also, shall the serpent, the author of our
   evils, be taken captive and overwhelmed." [3049] Thou hast made known
   to us, O Lord, Thy salvation, [3050] causing to spring up for us the
   plant of peace, and we shall no longer wander in error. Thou hast made
   known to us, O Lord, that Thou hast not unto the end overlooked Thy
   servants; neither hast Thou, O beneficent One, forgotten entirely the
   works of Thine hands. For out of Thy compassion for our low estate Thou
   hast shed forth upon us abundantly that goodness of Thine which is
   inexhaustible, and with Thy very nature cognate, having redeemed us by
   Thine only begotten Son, who is unchangeably like to Thee, and of one
   substance with Thee; judging it unworthy of Thy majesty and goodness to
   entrust to a servant the work of saving and benefiting Thy servants, or
   to cause that those who had offended should be reconciled by a
   minister. But by means of that light, which is of one substance with
   Thee, Thou hast given light to those that sat in darkness [3051] and in
   the shadow of death, in order that in Thy light they might see the
   light of knowledge; [3052] and it has seemed good to Thee, by means of
   our Lord and Creator, to fashion us again unto immortality; and Thou
   hast graciously given unto us a return to Paradise by means of Him who
   separated us from the joys of Paradise; and by means of Him who hath
   power to forgive sins Thou hast [3053] blotted out the handwriting
   which was against us. [3054] Lastly, by means of Him who is a partaker
   of Thy throne and who cannot be separated from Thy divine nature, Thou
   hast given unto us the gift of reconciliation and access unto Thee with
   confidence in order that, by the Lord who recognises the sovereign
   authority of none, by the true and omnipotent God, the subscribed
   sanction, as it were, of so many and such great blessings might
   constitute the justifying gifts of grace to be certain and indubitable
   rights to those who have obtained mercy. And this very thing the
   prophet before had announced in the words: No ambassador, nor angel,
   but the Lord Himself saved them; because He loved them, and spared
   them, and He took them up, and exalted them. [3055] And all this was,
   not of works of righteousness [3056] which we have done, nor because we
   loved Thee,--for our first earthly forefather, who was honourably
   entertained, in the delightful abode of Paradise, despised Thy divine
   and saving commandment, and was judged unworthy of that life-giving
   place, and mingling his seed with the bastard off-shoots of sin, he
   rendered it very weak;--but Thou, O Lord, of Thine own self, and of
   Thine ineffable love toward the creature of Thine hands, hast confirmed
   Thy mercy toward us, and, pitying our estrangement from Thee, hast
   moved Thyself at the sight of our degradation [3057] to take us into
   compassion. Hence, for the future, a joyous festival is established for
   us of the race of Adam, because the first Creator of Adam of His own
   free-will has become the Second Adam. And the brightness of the Lord
   our God hath come down to sojourn with us, so that we see God face to
   face, and are saved. Therefore, O Lord, I seek of Thee to be allowed to
   depart. I have seen Thy salvation; let me be delivered from the bent
   yoke of the letter. I have seen the King Eternal, to whom no other
   succeeds; let me be set free from this servile and burdensome chain. I
   have seen Him who is by nature my Lord and Deliverer; may I obtain,
   then, His decree for my deliverance. Set me free from the yoke of
   condemnation, and place me under the yoke of justification. Deliver me
   from the yoke of the curse, and of the letter that killeth; [3058] and
   enrol me in the blessed company of those who, by the grace of this Thy
   true Son, who is of equal glory and power with Thee, have been received
   into the adoption of sons.

   IX. Let then, says he, what I have thus far said in brief, suffice for
   the present as my offering of thanks to God. But what shall I say to
   thee, O mother-virgin and virgin-mother? For the praise even of her who
   is not man's work exceeds the power of man. Wherefore the dimness of my
   poverty I will make bright with the splendour of the gifts of the
   spirits that around thee shine, and offering to thee of thine own, from
   the immortal meadows I will pluck a garland for thy sacred and divinely
   crowned head. With thine ancestral hymns will I greet thee, O daughter
   of David, and mother of the Lord and God of David. For it were both
   base and inauspicious to adorn thee, who in thine own glory excellest
   with that which belongeth unto another. Receive, therefore, O lady most
   benignant, gifts precious, and such as are fitted to thee alone, O thou
   who art exalted above all generations, and who, amongst all created
   things, both visible and invisible, shinest forth as the most
   honourable. Blessed is the root of Jesse, and thrice blessed is the
   house of David, in which thou hast sprung up. [3059] God is in the
   midst of thee, and thou shalt not be moved, for the Most High hath made
   holy the place of His tabernacle. For in thee the covenants and oaths
   made of God unto the fathers have received a most glorious fulfilment,
   since by thee the Lord hath appeared, the God of hosts with us. That
   bush which could not be touched, [3060] which beforehand shadowed forth
   thy figure endowed with divine majesty, bare God without being
   consumed, who manifested Himself to the prophet just so far as He
   willed to be seen. Then, again, that hard and rugged rock, [3061] which
   imaged forth the grace and refreshment which has sprung out from thee
   for all the world, brought forth abundantly in the desert out of its
   thirsty sides a healing draught for the fainting people. Yea, moreover,
   the rod of the priest which, without culture, blossomed forth in fruit,
   [3062] the pledge and earnest of a perpetual priesthood, furnished no
   contemptible symbol of thy supernatural child-bearing. [3063] What,
   moreover? Hath not the mighty Moses expressly declared, that on account
   of these types of thee, hard to be understood, [3064] he delayed longer
   on the mountain, in order that he might learn, O holy one, the
   mysteries that with thee are connected? For being commanded to build
   the ark as a sign and similitude of this thing, he was not negligent in
   obeying the command, although a tragic occurrence happened on his
   descent from the mount; but having made it in size five cubits and a
   half, he appointed it to be the receptacle of the law, and covered it
   with the wings of the cherubim, most evidently pre-signifying thee, the
   mother of God, who hast conceived Him without corruption, and in an
   ineffable manner brought forth Him who is Himself, as it were, the very
   consistence of incorruption, and that within the limits of the five and
   a half circles of the world. On thy account, and the undefiled
   Incarnation of God, the Word, which by thee had place for the sake of
   that flesh which immutably and indivisibly remains with Him for ever.
   [3065] The golden pot also, as a most certain type, preserved the manna
   contained in it, which in other cases was changed day by day,
   unchanged, and keeping fresh for ages. The prophet Elijah [3066]
   likewise, as prescient of thy chastity, and being emulous of it through
   the Spirit, bound around him the crown of that fiery life, being by the
   divine decree adjudged superior to death. Thee also, prefiguring his
   successor Elisha, [3067] having been instructed by a wise master, and
   anticipating thy presence who wast not yet born, by certain sure
   indications of the things that would have place hereafter, [3068]
   ministered help and healing to those who were in need of it, which was
   of a virtue beyond nature; now with a new cruse, which contained
   healing salt, curing the deadly waters, to show that the world was to
   be recreated by the mystery manifested in thee; now with unleavened
   meal, in type responding to thy child-bearing, without being defiled by
   the seed of man, banishing from the food the bitterness of death; and
   then again, by efforts which transcended nature, rising superior to the
   natural elements in the Jordan, and thus exhibiting, in signs
   beforehand, the descent of our Lord into Hades, and His wonderful
   deliverance of those who were held fast in corruption. For all things
   yielded and succumbed to that divine image which prefigured thee.

   X. But why do I digress, and lengthen out my discourse, giving it the
   rein with these varied illustrations, and that when the truth of thy
   matter stands like a column before the eye, in which it were better and
   more profitable to luxuriate and delight in? Wherefore, bidding adieu
   to the spiritual narrations and wondrous deeds of the saints throughout
   all ages, I pass on to thee who art always to be had in remembrance,
   and who holdest the helm, as it were, of this festival. [3069]

   Blessed art thou, all-blessed, and to be desired of all. Blessed of the
   Lord is thy name, full of divine grace, and grateful exceedingly to
   God, mother of God, thou that givest light to the faithful. Thou art
   the circumscription, so to speak, of Him who cannot be circumscribed;
   the root [3070] of the most beautiful flower; the mother of the
   Creator; the nurse of the Nourisher; the circumference of Him who
   embraces all things; the upholder of Him [3071] who upholds all things
   by His word; the gate through which God appears in the flesh; [3072]
   the tongs of that cleansing coal; [3073] the bosom in small of that
   bosom which is all-containing; the fleece of wool, [3074] the mystery
   of which cannot be solved; the well of Bethlehem, [3075] that reservoir
   of life which David longed for, out of which the draught of immortality
   gushed forth; the mercy-seat [3076] from which God in human form was
   made known unto men; the spotless robe of Him who clothes Himself with
   light as with a garment. [3077] Thou hast lent to God, who stands in
   need of nothing, that flesh which He had not, in order that the
   Omnipotent might become that which it was his good pleasure to be. What
   is more splendid than this? What than this is more sublime? He who
   fills earth and heaven, [3078] whose are all things, has become in need
   of thee, for thou hast lent to God that flesh which He had not. Thou
   hast clad the Mighty One with that beauteous panoply of the body by
   which it has become possible for Him to be seen by mine eyes. And I, in
   order that I might freely approach to behold Him, have received that by
   which all the fiery darts of the wicked shall be quenched. [3079] Hail!
   hail! mother and handmaid of God. Hail! hail! thou to whom the great
   Creditor of all is a debtor. We are all debtors to God, but to thee He
   is Himself indebted.

   For He who said, "Honour thy father and thy mother," [3080] will have
   most assuredly, as Himself willing to be proved by such proofs, kept
   inviolate that grace, and His own decree towards her who ministered to
   Him that nativity to which He voluntarily stooped, and will have
   glorified with a divine honour her whom He, as being without a father,
   even as she was without a husband, Himself has written down as mother.
   Even so must these things be. For the hymns [3081] which we offer to
   thee, O thou most holy and admirable habitation of God, are no merely
   useless and ornamental words. Nor, again, is thy spiritual laudation
   mere secular trifling, or the shoutings of a false flattery, O thou who
   of God art praised; thou who to God gavest suck; who by nativity givest
   unto mortals their beginning of being, but they are of clear and
   evident truth. But the time would fail us, ages and succeeding
   generations too, to render unto thee thy fitting salutation as the
   mother of the King Eternal, [3082] even as somewhere the illustrious
   prophet says, teaching us how incomprehensible thou art. [3083] How
   great is the house of God, and how large is the place of His
   possession! Great, and hath none end, high and unmeasurable. For
   verily, verily, this prophetic oracle, and most true saying, is
   concerning thy majesty; for thou alone hast been thought worthy to
   share with God the things of God; who hast alone borne in the flesh
   Him, who of God the Father was the Eternally and Only-Begotten. So do
   they truly believe who hold fast to the pure faith. [3084]

   XI. But for the time that remains, my most attentive hearers, let us
   take up the old man, the receiver of God, and our pious teacher, who
   hath put in here, as it were, in safety from that virginal sea, and let
   us refresh him, both satisfied as to his divine longing, and conveying
   to us this most blessed theology; and let us ourselves follow out the
   rest of our discourse, directing our course unerringly with reference
   to our prescribed end, and that under the guidance of God the Almighty,
   so shall we not be found altogether unfruitful and unprofitable as to
   what is required of us. When, then, to these sacred rites, prophecy and
   the priesthood had been jointly called, and that pair of just ones
   elected of God--Simeon, I mean, and Anna, bearing in themselves most
   evidently the images of both peoples--had taken their station by the
   side of that glorious and virginal throne,--for by the old man was
   represented the people of Israel, and the law now waxing old; whilst
   the widow represents the Church of the Gentiles, which had been up to
   this point a widow,--the old man, indeed, as personating the law, seeks
   dismissal; but the widow, as personating the Church, brought her joyous
   confession of faith [3085] and spake of Him to all that looked for
   redemption in Jerusalem, even as the things that were spoken of both
   have been appositely and excellently recorded, and quite in harmony
   with the sacred festival. For it was fitting and necessary that the old
   man who knew so accurately that decree of the law, in which it is said:
   Hear Him, and every soul that will not hearken unto Him shall be cut
   off from His people, [3086] should seek a peaceful discharge from the
   tutorship of the law; for in truth it were insolence and presumption,
   when the king is present and addressing the people, for one of his
   attendants to make a speech over against him, and that to this man his
   subjects should incline their ears. It was necessary, too, that the
   widow who had been increased with gifts beyond measure, should in
   festal strains return her thanks to God; and so the things which there
   took place were agreeable to the law. But, for what remains, it is
   necessary to inquire how, since the prophetic types and figures bear,
   as has been shown, a certain analogy and relation to this prominent
   feast, it is said that the house was filled with smoke. Nor does the
   prophet say this incidentally, but with significance, speaking of that
   cry of the Thrice-Holy, [3087] uttered by the heavenly seraphs. You
   will discover the meaning of this, my attentive hearer, if you do but
   take up and examine what follows upon this narration: For hearing, he
   says, ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing, ye shall
   see, and not perceive. [3088] When, therefore, the foolish Jewish
   children had seen the glorious wonders which, as David sang, the Lord
   had performed in the earth, and had seen the sign from the depth [3089]
   and from the height meeting together, without division or confusion; as
   also Isaiah had before declared, namely, a mother beyond nature, and an
   offspring beyond reason; an earthly mother and a heavenly son; a new
   taking of man's nature, I say, by God, and a child-bearing without
   marriage; what in creation's circuit could be more glorious and more to
   be spoken of than this! yet when they had seen this it was all one as
   if they had not seen it; they closed their eyes, and in respect of
   praise were supine. Therefore the house in which they boasted was
   filled with smoke.

   XII. And in addition to this, when besides the spectacle, and even
   beyond the spectacle, they heard an old man, very righteous, very
   worthy of credit, worthy also of emulation, inspired by the Holy
   Spirit, a teacher of the law, honoured with the priesthood, illustrious
   in the gift of prophecy, by the hope which he had conceived of Christ,
   extending the limits of life, and putting off the debt of death--when
   they saw him, I say, leaping for joy, speaking words of good omen,
   quite transformed with gladness of heart, entirely rapt in a divine and
   holy ecstasy; who from a man had been changed into an angel by a godly
   change, and, for the immensity of his joy, chanted his hymn of
   thanksgiving, and openly proclaimed the "Light to lighten the Gentiles,
   and the glory of Thy people Israel." [3090] Not even then were they
   willing to hear what was placed within their hearing, and held in
   veneration by the heavenly beings themselves; wherefore the house in
   which they boasted was filled with smoke. Now smoke is a sign and sure
   evidence of wrath; as it is written, "There went up a smoke in His
   anger, and fire from His countenance devoured;" [3091] and in another
   place, "Amongst the disobedient people shall the fire burn," [3092]
   which plainly, in the revered Gospels, our Lord signified, when He said
   to the Jews, "Behold your house is left unto you desolate." [3093]
   Also, in another place, "The king sent forth his armies, and destroyed
   those murderers, and burnt up their city." [3094] Of such a nature was
   the adverse reward of the Jews for their unbelief, which caused them to
   refuse to pay to the Trinity the tribute of praise. For after that the
   ends of the earth were sanctified, and the mighty house of the Church
   was filled, by the proclamation of the Thrice Holy, with the glory of
   the Lord, as the great waters cover the seas, [3095] there happened to
   them the things which before had been declared, and the beginning of
   prophecy was confirmed by its issue, the preacher of truth signifying,
   as has been said, by the Holy Spirit, as it were in an example, the
   dreadful destruction which was to come upon them, in the words: "In the
   year in which king Uzziah died, I saw the Lord"--Uzziah, doubtless, as
   an apostate, being taken as the representative of the whole apostate
   body--the head of which he certainly was--who also, paying the penalty
   due to his presumption, carried on his forehead, as upon a brazen
   statue, the divine vengeance engraved, by the loathsomeness of leprosy,
   exhibiting to all the retribution of their loathsome impiety. Wherefore
   with divine wisdom did he, who had foreknowledge of these events,
   oppose the bringing in of the thankful Anna to the casting out of the
   ungrateful synagogue. Her very name also pre-signifies the Church, that
   by the grace of Christ and God is justified in baptism. For Anna is, by
   interpretation, grace.

   XIII. But here, as in port, putting in the vessel that bears the ensign
   of the cross, let us reef the sails of our oration, in order that it
   may be with itself commensurate. Only first, in as few words as
   possible, let us salute the city of the Great King [3096] together with
   the whole body of the Church, as being present with them in spirit, and
   keeping holy-day with the Father, and the brethren most held in honour
   there. Hail, thou city of the Great King, in which the mysteries of our
   salvation are consummated. Hail, thou heaven upon earth, Sion, the city
   that is for ever faithful unto the Lord. Hail, and shine thou
   Jerusalem, for thy light is come, the Light Eternal, the Light for ever
   enduring, the Light Supreme, the Light Immaterial, the Light of one
   substance with God and the Father, the Light which is in the Spirit,
   and in which is the Father; the Light which illumines the ages; the
   Light which gives light to mundane and supramundane things, Christ our
   very God. Hail, city sacred and elect of the Lord. Joyfully keep thy
   festal days, for they will not multiply so as to wax old and pass away.
   Hail, thou city most happy, for glorious things are spoken of thee; thy
   priest shall be clothed with righteousness, and thy saints shall shout
   for joy, and thy poor shall be satisfied with bread. [3097] Hail!
   rejoice, O Jerusalem, for the Lord reigneth in the midst of thee.
   [3098] That Lord, I say, who in His simple and immaterial Deity,
   entered our nature, and of the virgin's womb became ineffably
   incarnate; that Lord, who was partaker of nothing else save the lump of
   Adam, who was by the serpent tripped up. For the Lord laid not hold of
   the seed of angels [3099] --those, I say, who fell not away from that
   beauteous order and rank that was assigned to them from the beginning.
   To us He condescended, that Word who was always with the Father
   co-existent God. Nor, again, did He come into the world to restore; nor
   will He restore, as has been imagined by some impious advocates of the
   devil, those wicked demons who once fell from light; but when the
   Creator and Framer of all things had, as the most divine Paul says,
   laid hold of the seed of Abraham, and through him of the whole human
   race, He was made man for ever, and without change, in order that by
   His fellowship with us, and our joining on to Him, the ingress of sin
   into us might be stopped, its strength being broken by degrees, and
   itself as wax being melted, by that fire which the Lord, when He came,
   sent upon the earth. [3100] Hail to thee, thou Catholic Church, [3101]
   which hast been planted in all the earth, and do thou rejoice with us.
   Fear not, little flock, the storms of the enemy, [3102] for it is your
   Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom, and that you should
   tread upon the necks of your enemies. [3103] Hail, and rejoice, thou
   that wast once barren, and without seed unto godliness, but who hast
   now many children of faith. [3104] Hail, thou people of the Lord, thou
   chosen generation, thou royal priesthood, thou holy nation, thou
   peculiar people--show forth His praises who hath called you out of
   darkness into His marvellous light; and for His mercies glorify Him.
   [3105]

   XIV. Hail to thee for ever, thou virgin mother of God, our unceasing
   joy, for unto thee do I again return. [3106] Thou art the beginning of
   our feast; thou art its middle and end; [3107] the pearl of great price
   that belongest unto the kingdom; the fat of every victim, the living
   altar of the bread of life. Hail, thou treasure of the love of God.
   Hail, thou fount of the Son's love for man. Hail, thou overshadowing
   mount [3108] of the Holy Ghost. Thou gleamedst, sweet gift-bestowing
   mother, of the light of the sun; thou gleamedst with the insupportable
   fires of a most fervent charity, bringing forth in the end that which
   was conceived of thee before the beginning, making manifest the mystery
   hidden and unspeakable, the invisible Son of the Father--the Prince of
   Peace, who in a marvellous manner showed Himself as less than all
   littleness. Wherefore, we pray thee, the most excellent among women,
   who boastest in the confidence of thy maternal honours, that thou
   wouldest unceasingly keep us in remembrance. O holy mother of God,
   remember us, I say, who make our boast in thee, and who in hymns august
   celebrate the memory, which will ever live, and never fade away. And do
   thou also, O honoured and venerable Simeon, thou earliest host of our
   holy religion, and teacher of the resurrection of the faithful, be our
   patron and advocate with that Saviour God, whom thou wast deemed worthy
   to receive into thine arms. We, together with thee, sing our praises to
   Christ, who has the power of life and death, saying, Thou art the true
   Light, proceeding from the true Light; the true God, begotten of the
   true God; the one Lord, before Thine assumption of the humanity; that
   One nevertheless, after Thine assumption of it, which is ever to be
   adored; God of Thine own self and not by grace, but for our sakes also
   perfect man; in Thine own nature the King absolute and sovereign, but
   for us and for our salvation existing also in the form of a servant,
   yet immaculately and without defilement. For Thou who art incorruption
   hast come to set corruption free, that Thou mightest render all things
   uncorrupt. For Thine is the glory, and the power, and the greatness,
   and the majesty, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, for ever. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2986] The oration likewise treats of the Holy Theotocos. [Published by
   Pantinus, 1598, and obviously corrupt. Dupin states that it is "not
   mentioned by the ancients, nor even by Photius." The style resembles
   that of Methodius in many places.]

   [2987] 2 Cor. iii. 18.

   [2988] 2 Cor. v. 17.

   [2989] 2 Sam. vi. 7.

   [2990] Matt. xi. 28.

   [2991] 2 Sam. vi. 10.

   [2992] John i. 11; Ps. l. 3. elthen--emphanos. The text plainly
   requires this connection with evident allusion to Ps. l. "Our God will
   manifestly come" emphanos hexei, which passage our author connects with
   another from John i.--Tr.

   [2993] Ecclus. i. 10.

   [2994] 2 Cor. v. 17.

   [2995] ten akineton hettan enkauchesamenoi. It seems better to retain
   this. Pantinus would substitute aniketon for akineton, and render less
   happily "invicto hoc certamine victos."

   [2996] [See p. 309, note 1, supra, and the reflection upon even the
   Banquet of Philosophers, the Symposium of Plato.]

   [2997] Rom. ix. 5.

   [2998] Isa. vi. 1-9. The quotations are from LXX. version.

   [2999] musterion is, in the Greek Fathers, equivalent to the Latin
   Sacramentum.--Tr.

   [3000] Prov. viii. 9.

   [3001] hierateuma. Perhaps less definitely priesthood. Acc. Arist. it
   is he peri tous theous epimeleia. The cult and ordinances of religion
   to be observed especially by the priests, whose business it is to
   celebrate the excellence of God.--Tr.

   [3002] kata ten eudokian. Allusion is made to Eph. i. 5, According to
   the good pleasure of God, and His decree for the salvation of man. Less
   aptly Pantinus renders, ob propensam secæm in nos voluntatem.--Tr.

   [3003] "One and the same essence." This is the famous homoousiosof the
   Nicene Council.--Tr.

   [3004] hierophantes, teacher of the divine oracles. This, which is the
   technical term for the presiding priest at Eleusis, and the Greek
   translation of the Latin "Pontifex Maximus," is by our author applied
   to St. Paul.--Tr.

   [3005] 2 Cor. v. 19.

   [3006] 2 Sam. vi. 14.

   [3007] Hab. iii. 3.

   [3008] Exod. xv. 2.

   [3009] hupotitthion tunchanonta. It is an aggravation, so to speak,
   that He not only willed to become an infant, and to take upon Him, of
   necessity, the infirmities of infancy, but even at that tender age to
   be banished from His country, and to make a forcible change of
   residence, metoikos genesthan.  metoikoi are those who, at the command
   of their princes, are transferred, by way of punishment, to another
   State. Their lands are confiscated. They are sometimes called
   anaspastoi. Like to the condition of these was that of Jesus, who fled
   into Egypt soon after His birth. For the condition of the metoikoi at
   Athens, see Art. Smith's Dict. Antiq.--Tr.

   [3010] Exod. xxxi. 19.

   [3011] Rom. xi. 33.

   [3012] Luke xi. 24.

   [3013] Isa. lxvi. 7.

   [3014] Cf. Luke ii. 22.

   [3015] [Here seems to me a deep and true insight regarding the
   scriptural topics and events touched upon.]

   [3016] Isa. vi. 3.

   [3017] The quotation from the prophet Habakkuk is from the LXX.
   version.--Tr.

   [3018] Hab. iii. 2.

   [3019] Exod. xxv. 22.

   [3020] Gal. iv. 4, 5.

   [3021] Hab. ii. 20.

   [3022] Ps. xcvi. 9.

   [3023] [Note "made worthy;" so "found grace" and "my Saviour," in St.
   Luke. Hence not immaculate by nature.]

   [3024] Luke ii. 14.

   [3025] ton teiplasiasmon tes hagiotetos, Pantinus translates triplicem
   sanctitatis rationem, but this is hardly theological. Allusion is made
   to the song of the seraphim, Isa. vi.; and our author contends that the
   threefold hymn sung by the angels at Christ's birth answers to that
   threefold acclamation of theirs in sign of the triune Deity.--Tr.

   [3026] Ps. lxxii. 18, 19.

   [3027] ton ta panta en akatalepsia huperidrumenon. Cf. 1 Tim. vi. 16,
   phos oikon aprositon, hon eiden oudeis anthropon oude idein
   dunatai.--Tr.

   [3028] [This apostrophe is not prayer nor worship. (See sec. xiv.,
   infra.) It may be made by any orator. See Burgon's pertinent references
   to Legh Richmond and Bishop Horne, Lett. from Rome, pp. 237, 238.]

   [3029] Cant. ii. 16, 17.

   [3030] Ps. xcvii. 11.

   [3031] ho ton teloumenon teleiotes, initiator, consummator. dia tou
   Pneumatos hagiou is to be referred to sunekalesen, rather than to ton
   prattomenon .--Tr.

   [3032] ton authenten didaskalon. The allusion is to Mark i. 22.

   [3033] Exod. iii. 23.

   [3034] Isa. xliii. 10.

   [3035] Wisd. xv. 3.

   [3036] Ps. cxviii. 22; Isa. xxviii. 16; 1 Pet. ii. 6.

   [3037] Acts xviii. 28.

   [3038] Exod. xv. 2; Isa. xxv. 1; Ps. civ. 1.

   [3039] Isa. xlii. 7; Luke i. 79.

   [3040] 1 Tim. i. 17; Ps. xlv. 2.

   [3041] Isa. xi. 5.

   [3042] Isa. xlv. 8.

   [3043] 2 Cor. vii. 4.

   [3044] Exod. iii. 2.

   [3045] Dan. iii. 21.

   [3046] Exod. xix. 16.

   [3047] Ps. vi. 6.

   [3048] Luke ii. 29-32.

   [3049] Cant. viii. 6.

   [3050] Ps. xcviii. 2.

   [3051] Isa. ix. 2; xlii. 7; Luke i. 79.

   [3052] Ps. xxxvi. 9.

   [3053] Mark ii. 10.

   [3054] Col. ii. 4.

   [3055] Isa. lxiii. 9, Sept. version.

   [3056] Tit. iii. 5.

   [3057] John iv. 9.

   [3058] 2 Cor. iii. 6.

   [3059] Ps. xlvi. 4, 5.

   [3060] Exod. iii. 2.

   [3061] Exod. xvii. 6.

   [3062] Num. xvii. 8.

   [3063] Heb. ix. 4.

   [3064] Exod. xxv. 8.

   [3065] Heb. ix. 4.

   [3066] 2 Kings ii. 11.

   [3067] Ecclus. xlviii. 1.

   [3068] 2 Kings ii. 20; iv. 41; v.

   [3069] [The feast of the Purification. Here follows an impassioned
   apostrophe, which apart from its Oriental extravagance is full of
   poetical beauty. Its language, however, like that of other parts of
   this Oration, suggests at least interpolation, subsequent to the
   Nestorian controversy. Previously, there would have been no call for
   such vehemence of protestation.]

   [3070] Isa. xl. 1.

   [3071] Heb. i. 3.

   [3072] Ezek. xliv. 2.

   [3073] Isa. vi. 6.

   [3074] Judg. vi. 37.

   [3075] 2 Sam. xxiii. 17.

   [3076] Exod. xxxv. 17.

   [3077] Ps. civ. 2.

   [3078] Jer. xxiii. 24.

   [3079] Ephes. vi. 16.

   [3080] Exod. xx. 12.

   [3081] [Apostrophes like the above; panegyrical, not odes of worship.]

   [3082] 1 Tim. i. 17.

   [3083] Baruch iii. 24, 25.

   [3084] [This must have been interpolated after the Council of Ephesus,
   a.d. 431. The whole Oration is probably after that date.]

   [3085] Luke ii. 38.

   [3086] Deut. xviii. 15-19.

   [3087] Isa. vi. 4.

   [3088] Isa. vi. 9; Acts xxviii. 26.

   [3089] Ps. xlvi. 8; Isa. vii. 11.

   [3090] Luke ii. 32.

   [3091] Ps. xviii. 8.

   [3092] Ecclus. xxii. 7.

   [3093] Matt. xxiii. 38.

   [3094] Matt. xvii. 7.

   [3095] Isa. vi. 3, 4; i.

   [3096] Ps. xlviii. 2; Matt. v. 35; Isa. i. 26.

   [3097] Isa. lx. 1; Ps. lxxxvii. 3; Ps. cxxxii. 16.

   [3098] Isa. xii. 6.

   [3099] Heb. ii. 16.

   [3100] Luke xii. 49.

   [3101] [Here is an apostrophe to the Church, a hymn to "the Elect
   Lady." See, illustrating note 17, p. 390, supra.]

   [3102] trikumias, stormy waves. Latin, decumani fluctus. Methodius
   perhaps alludes to Diocletian's persecution, in which he perished as a
   martyr.--Tr.

   [3103] Luke xii. 32.

   [3104] Isa. liv. 1.

   [3105] 1 Pet. ii. 9.

   [3106] [He again apostrophizes the Blessed Theotocos, but in language
   hardly appropriate to the period preceding Cyril of Alexandria.]

   [3107] [Not so, for he ends with a noble strain of worship to the Son
   of God. This expression suggests interpolation.]

   [3108] Hab. iii. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Oration on the Palms. [3109]

   ------------------------

   I. Blessed be God; let us proceed, brethren, from wonders to the
   miracles of the Lord, and as it were, from strength to strength. [3110]
   For just as in a golden chain the links are so intimately joined and
   connected together, as that the one holds the other, and is fitted on
   to it, and so carries on the chain--even so the miracles that have been
   handed down by the holy Gospels, one after the other, lead on the
   Church of God, which delights in festivity, and refresh it, not with
   the meat that perisheth, but with that which endureth unto everlasting
   life. [3111] Come then, beloved, and let us, too, with prepared hearts,
   and with ears intent, listen to what the Lord our God shall say unto us
   out of the prophets and Gospels concerning this most sacred feast.
   Verily, He will speak peace unto His people, and to His saints, and to
   those which turn their hearts unto Him. To-day, [3112] the
   trumpet-blast of the prophets have roused the world, and have made glad
   and filled with joyfulness the churches of God that are everywhere
   amongst the nations. And, summoning the faithful from the exercise of
   holy fasting, and from the palæstra, wherein they struggle against the
   lusts of the flesh, they have taught them to sing a new hymn of
   conquest and a new song of peace to Christ who giveth the victory. Come
   then, every one, and let us rejoice in the Lord; O come, all ye people,
   and let us clap our hands, and make a joyful noise to God our Saviour,
   with the voice of melody. [3113] Let no one be without portion in this
   grace; let no one come short of this calling; for the seed of the
   disobedient is appointed to destruction.--Let no one neglect to meet
   the King, lest he be shut out from the Bridegroom's chamber.--Let no
   one amongst us be found to receive Him with a sad countenance, lest he
   be condemned with those wicked citizens--the citizens, I mean, who
   refused to receive the Lord as King over them. [3114] Let us all come
   together cheerfully; let us all receive Him gladly, and hold our feast
   with all honesty. Instead of our garments, let us strew our hearts
   before Him. [3115] In psalms and hymns, let us raise to Him our shouts
   of thanksgiving; and, without ceasing, let us exclaim, "Blessed is He
   that cometh in the name of the Lord;" [3116] for blessed are they that
   bless Him, and cursed are they that curse Him. [3117] Again I will say
   it, nor will I cease exhorting you to good, Come, beloved, let us bless
   Him who is blessed, that we may be ourselves blessed of Him. Every age
   and condition does this discourse summon to praise the Lord; kings of
   the earth, and all people; princes, and all judges of the earth; both
   young men and maidens [3118] --and what is new in this miracle, the
   tender and innocent age of babes and sucklings hath obtained the first
   place in raising to God with thankful confession the hymn which was of
   God taught them in the strains in which Moses sang before to the people
   when they came forth out of Egypt--namely, "Blessed is He that cometh
   in the name of the Lord."

   II. To-day, holy David rejoices with great joy, being by babes
   despoiled of his lyre, with whom also, in spirit, leading the dance,
   and rejoicing together, as of old, before the ark of God, [3119] he
   mingles musical harmony, and sweetly lisps out in stammering voice,
   Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord. Of whom shall we
   inquire? Tell us, O prophet, who is this that cometh in the name of the
   Lord? He will say it is not my part to-day to teach you, for He hath
   consecrated the school to infants, who hath out of the mouth of babes
   and sucklings perfected praise to destroy the enemy and the avenger,
   [3120] in order that by the miracle of these the hearts of the fathers
   might be turned to the children, and the disobedient unto the wisdom of
   the just. [3121] Tell us, then, O children, whence is this, your
   beautiful and graceful contest of song? Who taught it you? Who
   instructed you? Who brought you together? What were your tablets? Who
   were your teachers? Do but you, they say, join us as our companions in
   this song and festivity, and you will learn the things which were by
   Moses and the prophet earnestly longed for. [3122] Since then the
   children have invited us, and have given unto us the right hand of
   fellowship, [3123] let us come, beloved, and ourselves emulate that
   holy chorus, and with the apostles, let us make way for Him who ascends
   over the heaven of heavens towards the East, [3124] and who, of His
   good pleasure, is upon the earth mounted upon an ass's colt. Let us,
   with the children, raise the branches aloft, and with the olive
   branches make glad applaud, that upon us also the Holy Spirit may
   breathe, and that in due order we may raise the God-taught strain:
   "Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the
   highest." [3125] To-day, also, the patriarch Jacob keeps feast in
   spirit, seeing his prophecy brought to a fulfilment, and with the
   faithful adores the Father, seeing Him who bound his foal to the vine
   [3126] mounted upon an ass's colt. To-day the foal is made ready, the
   irrational exemplar of the Gentiles, who before were irrational, to
   signify the subjection of the people of the Gentiles; and the babes
   declare their former state of childhood, in respect of the knowledge of
   God, and their after perfecting, by the worship of God and the exercise
   of the true religion. To-day, according to the prophet, [3127] is the
   King of Glory glorified upon earth, and makes us, the inhabitants of
   earth, partakers of the heavenly feast, that He may show himself to be
   the Lord of both, even as He is hymned with the common praises of both.
   Therefore it was that the heavenly hosts sang, announcing salvation
   upon earth, "Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God of hosts; the whole
   earth is full of His glory." [3128] And those below, joining in harmony
   with the joyous hymns of heaven, cried: "Hosanna in the highest;
   Hosanna to the Son of David." In heaven the doxology was raised,
   "Blessed be the glory of the Lord from His place;" [3129] and on earth
   was this caught up in the words, "Blessed is he that cometh in the name
   of the Lord."

   III. But while these things were doing, and the disciples were
   rejoicing and praising God with a loud voice for all the mighty works
   that they had seen, saying, Blessed be the King that cometh in the name
   of the Lord; peace in heaven, and glory in the highest; [3130] the city
   began to inquire, saying, Who is this? [3131] stirring up its hardened
   and inveterate envy against the glory of the Lord. But when thou
   hearest me say the city, understand the ancient and disorderly
   multitude of the synagogue. They ungratefully and malignantly ask, Who
   is this? as if they had never yet seen their Benefactor, and Him whom
   divine miracles, beyond the power of man, had made famous and renowned;
   for the darkness comprehended not [3132] that unsetting light which
   shone in upon it. Hence quite appositely with respect to them hath the
   prophet Isaiah exclaimed, saying, Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind,
   that ye may see. And who is blind, but my children? and deaf, but they
   that have the dominion over them? [3133] And the servants of the Lord
   have become blind; ye have often seen, but ye observed not; your ears
   are opened, yet ye hear not. See, beloved, how accurate are these
   words; how the Divine Spirit, who Himself sees beforehand into the
   future, has by His saints foretold of things future as if they were
   present. For these thankless men saw, and by means of His miracles
   handled the wonder-working God, and yet remained in unbelief. [3134]
   They saw a man, blind from his birth, proclaiming to them the God who
   had restored his sight. They saw a paralytic, who had grown up, as it
   were, and become one with his infirmity, at His bidding loosed from his
   disease. [3135] They saw Lazarus, who was made an exile from the region
   of death. [3136] They heard that He had walked on the sea. [3137] They
   heard of the wine that, without previous culture, was ministered;
   [3138] of the bread that was eaten at that spontaneous banquet; [3139]
   they heard that the demons had been put to flight; the sick restored to
   health. [3140] Their very streets proclaimed His deeds of wonder; their
   roads declared His healing power to those who journeyed on them. All
   Judea was filled with His benefit; yet now, when they hear the divine
   praises, they inquire, Who is this? O the madness of these
   falsely-named teachers! O incredulous fathers! O foolish seniors! O
   seed of the shameless Canaan, and not of Judah the devout! [3141] The
   children acknowledge their Creator, but their unbelieving parents said,
   Who is this? The age that was young and inexperienced sang praises to
   God, while they that had waxen old in wickedness inquired, Who is this?
   Sucklings praise His Divinity, while seniors utter blasphemies;
   children piously offer the sacrifice of praise, whilst profane priests
   are impiously indignant. [3142]

   IV. O ye disobedient as regards the wisdom of the just, [3143] turn
   your hearts to your children. Learn the mysteries of God; the very
   thing itself which is being done bears witness that it is God that is
   thus hymned by uninstructed tongues. Search the Scriptures, as ye have
   heard [3144] from the Lord; for they are they which testify of Him, and
   be not ignorant of this miracle. Hear ye men without grace, and
   thankless, what good tidings the prophet Zechariah brings to you. He
   says, Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; behold thy King cometh unto
   thee: just and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon the foal of an
   ass. [3145] Why do ye repel the joy? Why, when the sun shineth, do ye
   love darkness? Why do ye against unconquerable peace meditate war? If,
   therefore, ye be the sons of Zion, join in the dance together with your
   children. Let the religious service of your children be to you a
   pretext for joy. Learn from them who was their Teacher; who called them
   together; whence was the doctrine; what means this new theology and old
   prophecy. And if no man hath taught them this, but of their own accord
   they raise the hymn of praise, then recognise the work of God, even as
   it is written in the law: "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast
   Thou perfected praise." [3146] Redouble, therefore, your joy, that you
   have been made the fathers of such children who, under the teaching of
   God, have celebrated with their praises things unknown to their
   seniors. Turn your hearts to your children, [3147] and close not your
   eyes against the truth. But if you remain the same, and hearing, hear
   not, and seeing, perceive not, [3148] and to no purpose dissent from
   your children, then shall they be your judges [3149] according to the
   Saviour's word. Well, therefore, even this thing also, together with
   others, has the prophet Isaiah spoken before of you, saying, Jacob
   shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale. But when
   they see their children doing my works, they shall for me sanctify My
   name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of
   Israel. They also that err in spirit shall come to understanding, and
   they that murmured shall learn obedience, and the stammering tongues
   shall learn to speak peace. [3150] Seest thou, O foolish Jew, how from
   the beginning of his discourse, the prophet declares confusion to you
   because of your unbelief. Learn even from him how he proclaims the
   God-inspired hymn of praise that is raised by your children, even as
   the blessed David hath declared beforehand; saying, Out of the mouth of
   babes and sucklings hast Thou perfected praise. Either then,--as is
   right,--claim the piety of your children for your own, or devoutly give
   your children unto us. We with them will lead the dance, and to the new
   glory will sing in concert the divinely-inspired hymn.

   V. Once, indeed, the aged Simeon met the Saviour [3151] and received in
   his arms, as an infant, the Creator of the world, and proclaimed Him to
   be Lord and God; but now, in the place of foolish elders, children meet
   the Saviour, even as Simeon did, and instead of their arms, strew under
   Him the branches of trees, and bless the Lord God seated upon a colt,
   as upon the cherubim, Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed is He that
   cometh in the name of the Lord; and together with these let us also
   exclaim, Blessed is He that cometh, God the King of Glory, who, for our
   sakes, became poor, yet, in His own proper estate, being ignorant of
   poverty, that with His bounty He might make us rich. Blessed is He who
   once came in humility, and who will hereafter come again in glory: at
   the first, lowly, and seated upon an ass's colt, and by infants
   extolled in order that it might be fulfilled which was written: Thy
   goings have been seen, O God; even the goings of my God, my King, in
   the sanctuary; but at the second time seated on the clouds, in terrible
   majesty, by angels and powers attended. O the mellifluous tongue of the
   children! O the sincere doctrine of those who are well pleasing to God!
   David in prophecy hid the spirit under the letter; children, opening
   their treasures, brought forth riches upon their tongues, and, in
   language full of grace, invited clearly all men to enjoy them.
   Therefore let us with them draw forth the unfading riches. In our
   bosoms insatiate, and in treasure-houses which cannot be filled, let us
   lay up the divine gifts. Let us exclaim without ceasing, Blessed is He
   that cometh in the name of the Lord! Very God, in the name of the Very
   God, the Omnipotent from the Omnipotent, the Son in the name of the
   Father. The true King from the true King, whose kingdom, even as His
   who begat Him, is with eternity, coeval and pre-existent to it. For
   this is common to both; nor does the Scripture attribute this honour to
   the Son, as if it came from another source, nor as if it had a
   beginning, or could be added to or diminished--away with the
   thought!--but as that which is His of right by nature, and by a true
   and proper possession. For the kingdom of the Father, of the Son, and
   of the Holy Ghost, is one, even as their substance is one and their
   dominion one. Whence also, with one and the same adoration, we worship
   the one Deity in three Persons, subsisting without beginning, uncreate,
   without end, and to which there is no successor. For neither will the
   Father ever cease to be the Father, nor again the Son to be the Son and
   King, nor the Holy Ghost to be what in substance and personality He is.
   For nothing of the Trinity will suffer diminution, either in respect of
   eternity, or of communion, or of sovereignty. For not on that account
   is the Son of God called king, because for our sakes He was made man,
   and in the flesh cast down the tyrant that was against us, having, by
   taking this upon Him, obtained the victory over its cruel enemy, but
   because He is always Lord and God; therefore it is that now, both after
   His assumption of the flesh and for ever, He remains a king, even as He
   who begat Him. Speak not, O heretic, against the kingdom of Christ,
   lest thou dishonour Him who begat Him. If thou art faithful, in faith
   approach Christ, our very God, and not as using your liberty for a
   cloak of maliciousness. If thou art a servant, with trembling be
   subject unto thy Master; for he who fights against the Word is not a
   well-disposed servant, but a manifest enemy, as it is written: He that
   honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the Father which hath sent Him.

   VI. But let us, beloved, return in our discourse to that point whence
   we digressed, exclaiming, Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the
   Lord: that good and kind Shepherd, voluntarily to lay down His life for
   His sheep. That just as hunters take by a sheep the wolves that devour
   sheep, even so the Chief Shepherd, [3152] offering Himself as man to
   the spiritual wolves and those who destroy the soul, may make His prey
   of the destroyers by means of that Adam who was once preyed on by them.
   Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord: God against the
   devil; not manifestly in His might, which cannot be looked on, but in
   the weakness of the flesh, to bind the strong man [3153] that is
   against us. Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord: the King
   against the tyrant; not with omnipotent power and wisdom, but with that
   which is accounted the foolishness [3154] of the cross, which hath reft
   his spoils from the serpent who is wise in wickedness. Blessed is He
   that cometh in the name of the Lord: the True One against the liar; the
   Saviour against the destroyer; the Prince of Peace [3155] against him
   who stirs up wars; the Lover of mankind against the hater of mankind.
   Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord: the Lord to have
   mercy upon the creature of His hands. Blessed is He that cometh in the
   name of the Lord: the Lord to save man who had wandered in error; to
   put away error; to give light to those who are in darkness; to abolish
   the imposture of idols; in its place to bring in the saving knowledge
   of God; to sanctify the world; to drive away the abomination and misery
   of the worship of false gods. Blessed is He that cometh in the name of
   the Lord: the one for the many; to deliver the poor [3156] out of the
   hands of them that are too strong for him, yea, the poor and needy from
   him that spoileth him. Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the
   Lord, to pour wine and oil upon him who had fallen amongst thieves,
   [3157] and had been passed by. Blessed is He that cometh in the name of
   the Lord: to save us by Himself, as says the prophet; no ambassador,
   nor angel, but the Lord Himself saved us. [3158] Therefore we also
   bless Thee, O Lord; Thou with the Father and the Holy Spirit art
   blessed before the worlds and for ever. Before the world, indeed, and
   until now being devoid of body, but now and for ever henceforth
   possessed of that divine humanity which cannot be changed, and from
   which Thou art never divided.

   VII. Let us look also at what follows. What says the most divine
   evangelist? When the Lord had entered into the temple, the blind and
   the lame came to Him; and He healed them. And when the chief priests
   and Pharisees saw the wonderful things that He did, and the children
   crying, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed is He that
   cometh in the name of the Lord, [3159] they brooked not this honour
   that was paid Him, and therefore they came to Him, and thus spake,
   Hearest Thou not what these say? As if they said, Art Thou not grieved
   at hearing from these innocents things which befit God, and God alone?
   Has not God of old made it manifest by the prophet, "My glory will I
   not give unto another;" [3160] and how dost Thou, being a man, make
   Thyself God? [3161] But what to this answers the long-suffering One, He
   who is abundant in mercy, [3162] and slow to wrath? [3163] He bears
   with these frenzied ones; with an apology He keeps their wrath in
   check; in His turn He calls the Scriptures to their remembrance; He
   brings forward testimony to what is done, and shrinks not from inquiry.
   Wherefore He says, Have ye never heard Me saying by the prophet, Then
   shall ye know that I am He that doth speak? [3164] nor again, Out of
   the mouth of babes and sucklings hast Thou perfected praise because of
   Thine enemies, that Thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger?
   Which without doubt are ye, who give heed unto the law, and read the
   prophets, while yet ye despise Me who, both by the law and the
   prophets, have been beforehand proclaimed. Ye think, indeed, under a
   pretence of piety, to avenge the glory of God, not understanding that
   he that despiseth Me despiseth My Father also. [3165] I came forth from
   God, and am come into the world, [3166] and My glory is the glory of My
   Father also. Even thus these foolish ones, being convinced by our
   Saviour-God, ceased to answer Him again, the truth stopping their
   mouths; but adopting a new and foolish device, they took counsel
   against Him. But let us sing, Great is our Lord, and great is His
   power; [3167] and of His understanding there is no number. For all this
   was done that the Lamb and Son of God, that taketh away the sins of the
   world, might, of His own will, and for us, come to His saving Passion,
   and might be recognised, as it were, in the market and place of
   selling; and that those who bought Him might for thirty pieces of
   silver covenant for Him who, with His life-giving blood, was to redeem
   the world; and that Christ, our passover, might be sacrificed for us,
   in order that those who were sprinkled with His precious blood, and
   sealed on their lips, as the posts of the door, [3168] might escape
   from the darts of the destroyer; and that Christ having thus suffered
   in the flesh, and having risen again the third day, might, with equal
   honour and glory with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be by all created
   things equally adored; for to Him every knee shall bow, of things in
   heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, [3169] sending
   up glory to Him, for ever and ever. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3109] [Dupin hardly credits this oration to Methodius. See
   elucidation, p. 398.]

   [3110] Ps. lxxxiv. 8.

   [3111] John vi. 27.

   [3112] [Evidently a homily for Palm Sunday, the first day of the
   Paschal week.]

   [3113] Ps. lxxxv. 9; xcv. 1; xlvii. 1.

   [3114] Luke xix. 27.

   [3115] Ps. lxii. 8.

   [3116] Ps. cxviii. 26; Matt. xxi. 9; Mark xi. 9; Luke xix. 38; John
   xii. 13.

   [3117] Gen. xxvii. 29.

   [3118] Ps. cxlviii. 11, 12.

   [3119] 2 Sam. vi. 14.

   [3120] Ps. viii. 2.

   [3121] Mal. iv. 6; Luke i. 17.

   [3122] Luke x. 24.

   [3123] Gal. ii. 9.

   [3124] Ps. lxviii. 4, 34.

   [3125] Matt. xxi. 5.

   [3126] Gen. xlix. 10.

   [3127] Ps. cxlviii. 9.

   [3128] Isa. vi. 3.

   [3129] Ezek. iii. 22.

   [3130] Luke xix. 37, 38.

   [3131] Matt. xxi. 10.

   [3132] John i. 5.

   [3133] Isa. xlii. 18-20.

   [3134] John ix.

   [3135] John v. 5.

   [3136] John xi. 44.

   [3137] Matt. xiv. 26.

   [3138] John ii. 7.

   [3139] John vi. 11.

   [3140] Luke viii. 29, etc.

   [3141] Dan. iii. 56 (LXX.).

   [3142] Matt. xxi. 15.

   [3143] Luke i. 17.

   [3144] John v. 39.

   [3145] Zech. ix. 9.

   [3146] Ps. viii. 2.

   [3147] Luke i. 17.

   [3148] Isa. vi. 10.

   [3149] Matt. xii. 27.

   [3150] Isa. xxix. 22, 24.

   [3151] Luke ii. 29.

   [3152] 1 Pet. v. 4.

   [3153] Matt. xii. 29.

   [3154] 1 Cor. i. 21.

   [3155] Isa. ix. 6.

   [3156] Ps. xxxv. 10.

   [3157] Luke x. 34.

   [3158] Isa. lxiii. 9.

   [3159] Matt. xxi. 14-16.

   [3160] Isa. xlii. 8.

   [3161] John x. 33.

   [3162] Joel ii. 13.

   [3163] James i. 18.

   [3164] Isa. lii. 6.

   [3165] John xv. 23.

   [3166] John xvi. 28.

   [3167] Ps. clxvii. 5.

   [3168] Exod. xi. 7.

   [3169] Phil. ii. 10.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Elucidations.

   ------------------------

   The candid Dupin [3170] says that we owe this to Père Combefis, [3171]
   on the authority of a ms. in the Royal Library of Paris. It appeared in
   Sir Henry Savile's edition of Chrysostom ascribed to that Father. Dupin
   doubts as to parts of this homily, if not as to the whole. He adds,
   "The style of Methodius is Asiatic, diffuse, swelling, and abounding in
   epithet. His expressions are figurative, and the turn of his sentences
   artificial. He is full of similitudes and far-fetched allegories. His
   thoughts are mysterious, and he uses many words to say a few things."
   His doctrine, apart from these faults, is sound, and free from some
   errors common to the ancients: such faults as I have frequently
   apologized for in Origen, whom Methodius so generally condemns.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3170] Ecclesiastical Writers, vol. i. p. 161.

   [3171] He was a Dominican, and learned in Greek. Died 1679.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
