# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume VI.   Jerome - Letters and Select Works
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume VI.
# father: jerome
# work: Select Works (NPNF2 VI remainder)
# latin_match_candidate: (none)
# extracted: 2026-09-01
# note: Public-domain Schaff English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
The Dialogue Against the Luciferians.

   ------------------------

   Introduction.

   This Dialogue was written about 379, seven years after the death of
   Lucifer, and very soon after Jerome's return from his hermit life in
   the desert of Chalcis. Though he received ordination from Paulinus, who
   had been consecrated by Lucifer, he had no sympathy with Lucifer's
   narrower views, as he shows plainly in this Dialogue. Lucifer, who was
   bishop of Cagliari in Sardinia, first came into prominent notice about
   a.d. 354, when great efforts were being made to procure a condemnation
   of S. Athanasius by the Western bishops. He energetically took up the
   cause of the saint, and at his own request was sent by Liberius, bishop
   of Rome, in company with the priest Pancratius and the deacon Hilarius,
   on a mission to the Emperor Constantius. The emperor granted a Council,
   which met at Milan in a.d. 354. Lucifer distinguished himself by
   resisting a proposition to condemn Athanasius, and did not hesitate to
   oppose the emperor with much violence. In consequence of this he was
   sent into exile from a.d. 355 to a.d. 361, the greater portion of which
   time was spent at Eleutheropolis in Palestine, though he afterwards
   removed to the Thebaid. It was at this time that his polemical writings
   appeared, the tone and temper of which is indicated by the mere titles
   De Regibus Apostaticis (of Apostate Kings), De non Conveniendo cum
   Hæreticis, etc. (of not holding communion with heretics). On the death
   of Constantius in 361, Julian permitted the exiled bishops to return;
   but Lucifer instead of going to Alexandria where a Council was to be
   held under the presidency of Athanasius for the healing of a schism in
   the Catholic party at Antioch (some of which held to Meletius, while
   others followed Eustathius), preferred to go straight to Antioch. There
   he ordained Paulinus, the leader of the latter section, as bishop of
   the Church. Eusebius of Vercellæ soon arrived with the synodal letters
   of the Council of Alexandria, but, finding himself thus anticipated,
   and shrinking from a collision with his friend, he retired immediately.
   Lucifer stayed, and "declared that he would not hold communion with
   Eusebius or any who adopted the moderate policy of the Alexandrian
   Council. By this Council it had been determined that actual Arians, if
   they renounced their heresy, should be pardoned, but not invested with
   ecclesiastical functions; and that those bishops who had merely
   consented to Arianism should remain undisturbed. It was this latter
   concession which offended Lucifer, and he became henceforth the
   champion of the principle that no one who had yielded to any compromise
   whatever with Arianism should be allowed to hold an ecclesiastical
   office." He was thus brought into antagonism with Athanasius himself,
   who, it has been seen, presided at Alexandria. Eventually he returned
   to his see in Sardinia where, according to Jerome's Chronicle, he died
   in 371. Luciferianism became extinct in the beginning of the following
   century, if not earlier. It hardly appears to have been formed into a
   separate organization, though an appeal was made to the emperor by some
   Luciferian presbyters about the year 384, and both Ambrose and
   Augustine speak of him as having fallen into the schism.

   The argument of the Dialogue may be thus stated. It has been pointed
   out above that Lucifer of Cagliari, who had been banished from his see
   in the reign of Constantius because of his adherence to the cause of
   Athanasius, had, on the announcement of toleration at the accession of
   Julian (361), gone to Antioch and consecrated Paulinus a bishop. There
   were then three bishops of Antioch, Dorotheus the Arian (who had
   succeeded Euzoius in 376), Meletius who, though an Athanasian in
   opinion, had been consecrated by Arians or Semi-Arians, and Paulinus;
   besides Vitalis, bishop of a congregation of Apollinarians. Lucifer, in
   the earnestness of his anti-Arian opinion, refused to acknowledge as
   bishops those who had come over from Arianism, though he accepted the
   laymen who had been baptized by Arian bishops. This opinion led to the
   Luciferian schism, and forms the subject of the Dialogue.

   The point urged by Orthodoxus throughout is that, since the Luciferian
   accepts as valid the baptism conferred by Arian bishops, it is
   inconsistent in him not to acknowledge the bishops who have repented of
   their Arian opinions. The Luciferian at first (2) in his eagerness,
   declares the Arians to be no better than heathen; but he sees that he
   has gone too far, and retracts this opinion. Still it is one thing, he
   says, (3) to admit a penitent neophyte, another to admit a man to be
   bishop and celebrate the Eucharist. We do not wish, he says (4) to
   preclude individuals who have fallen from repentance. And we, replies
   Orthodoxus, by admitting the bishops save not them only but their
   flocks also. "The salt," says the Luciferian (5), "which has lost its
   savour cannot be salted," and, "What communion has Christ with Belial?"
   But this, it is answered (6), would prove that Arians could not confer
   baptism at all. Yes, says the objector, they are like John the Baptist,
   whose baptism needed to be followed by that of Christ. But, it is
   replied, the bishop gives Christ's baptism and confers the Holy Spirit.
   The confirmation which follows (9) is rather a custom of the churches
   than the necessary means of grace.

   The argument is felt to be approaching to a philosophical logomachy
   (10, 11), but it is resumed by the Luciferian. There is a real
   difference, he says (12), between the man who in his simplicity accepts
   baptism from an Arian bishop, and the bishop himself who understands
   the heresy. Yet both, it is replied (13), when they are penitent,
   should be received.

   At this point (14) the Luciferian yields. But he wishes to be assured
   that what Orthodoxus recommends has been really the practice of the
   Church. This leads to a valuable chapter of Church history. Orthodoxus
   recalls the victories of the Church, which the Luciferians speak of as
   corrupt (15). The shame is that, though they have the true creed, they
   have too little faith. He then describes (17, 18) how the orthodox
   bishops were beguiled into accepting the creed of Ariminum, but
   afterwards saw their error (19). "The world groaned to find itself
   Arian." They did all that was possible to set things right. Why should
   they not be received, as all but the authors of heresy had been
   received at Nicæa? (20) Lucifer who was a good shepherd, and Hilary the
   Deacon, in separating their own small body into a sect have left the
   rest a prey to the wolf (20, 21). The wheat and tares must grow
   together (22). This has been the principle of the Church (23), as shown
   by Scripture (24) and Apostolic custom, and even Cyprian, when he
   wished penitent heretics to be re-baptized (25), could not prevail.
   Even Hilary by receiving baptism from the Church which always has
   re-admitted heretics in repentance (26, 27) acknowledges this
   principle. In that Church and its divisions and practice it is our duty
   to abide.

   1. It happened not long ago that a follower of Lucifer had a dispute
   with a son of the Church. His loquacity was odious and the language he
   employed most abusive. For he declared that the world belonged to the
   devil, and, as is commonly said by them at the present day, that the
   Church was turned into a brothel. His opponent on the other hand, with
   reason indeed, but without due regard to time and place, urged that
   Christ did not die in vain, and that it was for something more than a
   Sardinian cloak of skins [4049] that the Son of God came down from
   heaven. To be brief, the dispute was not settled when night interrupted
   the debate, and the lighting of the street-lamps gave the signal for
   the assembly to disperse. The combatants therefore withdrew, almost
   spitting in each other's faces, an arrangement having been previously
   made by the audience for a meeting in a quiet porch at daybreak.
   Thither, accordingly, they all came, and it was resolved that the words
   of both speakers should be taken down by reporters.

   2. When all were seated, Helladius the Luciferian said, I want an
   answer first to my question. Are the Arians Christians or not?

   Orthodoxus. I answer with another question, Are all heretics
   Christians?

   L. If you call a man a heretic you deny that he is a Christian.

   O. No heretics, then, are Christians.

   L. I told you so before.

   O. If they are not Christ's, they belong to the devil.

   L. No one doubts that.

   O. But if they belong to the devil, it makes no difference whether they
   are heretics or heathen.

   L. I do not dispute the point.

   O. We are then agreed that we must speak of a heretic as we would of a
   heathen.

   L. Just so.

   O. Now it is decided that heretics are heathen, put any question you
   please.

   L. What I wanted to elicit by my question has been expressly stated,
   namely, that heretics are not Christians. Now comes the inference. If
   the Arians are heretics, and all heretics are heathen, the Arians are
   heathen too. But if the Arians are heathen and it is beyond dispute
   that the church has no communion with the Arians, that is with the
   heathen, it is clear that your church which welcomes bishops from the
   Arians, that is from the heathen, receives priests of the Capitol
   [4050] rather than bishops, and accordingly it ought more correctly to
   be called the synagogue of Anti-Christ than the Church of Christ.

   O. Lo! what the prophet said is fulfilled: [4051] "They have digged a
   pit before me, they have fallen into the midst thereof themselves."

   L. How so?

   O. If the Arians are, as you say, heathen, and the assemblies of the
   Arians are the devil's camp, how is it that you receive a person who
   has been baptized in the devil's camp?

   L. I do receive him, but as a penitent.

   O. The fact is you don't know what you are saying. Does any one receive
   a penitent heathen?

   L. In my simplicity I replied when we began that all heretics are
   heathen. But the question was a captious one, and you shall have the
   full credit of victory in the first point. I will now proceed to the
   second and maintain that a layman coming from the Arians ought to be
   received if penitent, but not a cleric.

   O. And yet, if you concede me the first point, the second is mine too.

   L. Show me how it comes to be yours.

   O. Don't you know that the clergy and laity have only one Christ, and
   that there is not one God of converts and another of bishops? Why then
   should not he who receives laymen receive clerics also?

   L. There is a difference between shedding tears for sin, and handling
   the body of Christ; there is a difference between lying prostrate at
   the feet of the brethren, and from the high altar administering the
   Eucharist to the people. It is one thing to lament over the past,
   another to abandon sin and live the glorified life in the Church. You
   who yesterday impiously declared the Son of God to be a creature, you
   who every day, worse than a Jew, were wont to cast the stones of
   blasphemy at Christ, you whose hands are full of blood, whose pen was a
   soldier's spear, do you, the convert of a single hour, come into the
   Church as an adulterer might come to a virgin? If you repent of your
   sin, abandon your priestly functions: if you are shameless in your sin,
   remain what you were.

   O. You are quite a rhetorician, and fly from the thicket of controversy
   to the open fields of declamation. But, I entreat you, refrain from
   common-places, and return to the ground and the lines marked out;
   afterwards, if you like, we will take a wider range.

   L. There is no declamation in the case; my indignation is more than I
   can bear. Make what statements you please, argue as you please, you
   will never convince me that a penitent bishop should be treated like a
   penitent layman.

   O. Since you put the whole thing in a nutshell and obstinately cling to
   your position, that the case of the bishop is different from that of
   the layman, I will do what you wish, and I shall not be sorry to avail
   myself of the opportunity you offer and come to close quarters. Explain
   why you receive a layman coming from the Arians, but do not receive a
   bishop.

   L. I receive a layman who confesses that he has erred; and the Lord
   willeth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent.

   O. Receive then also a bishop who, as well as the layman, confesses
   that he has erred, and it still holds good that the Lord willeth not
   the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent.

   L. If he confesses his error why does he continue a bishop? Let him lay
   aside his [4052] episcopal functions, and I grant pardon to the
   penitent.

   O. I will answer you in your own words. If a layman confesses his
   error, how is it he continues a layman? Let him lay aside his
   lay-priesthood, that is, his baptism, and I grant pardon to the
   penitent. For it is written [4053] "He made us to be a kingdom, to be
   priests unto his God and Father." And again, [4054] "A holy nation, a
   royal priesthood, an elect race." Everything which is forbidden to a
   Christian, is forbidden to both bishop and layman. He who does penance
   condemns his former life. If a penitent bishop may not continue what he
   was, neither may a penitent layman remain in that state on account of
   which he confesses himself a penitent.

   L. We receive the laity, because no one will be induced to change, if
   he knows he must be baptized again. And then, if they are rejected, we
   become the cause of their destruction.

   O. By receiving a layman you save a single soul: and I in receiving a
   bishop unite to the Church, I will not say the people of one city, but
   the whole [4055] province of which he is the head; if I drive him away,
   he will drag down many with him to ruin. Wherefore I beseech you to
   apply the same reason which you think you have for receiving the few to
   the salvation of the whole world. But if you are not satisfied with
   this, if you are so hard, or rather so unreasonably unmerciful as to
   think him who gave baptism an enemy of Christ, though you account him
   who received it a son, we do not so contradict ourselves: we either
   receive a bishop as well as the people which is constituted as a
   Christian people by him, or if we do not receive a bishop, we know that
   we must also reject his people.

   5. L. Pray, have you not read what is said concerning the bishops,
   [4056] "Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost its
   savour, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for
   nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under foot of man." And then
   there is the fact that the priest [4057] intercedes with God for the
   sinful people, while there is no one to entreat for the priest. Now
   these two passages of Scripture tend to the same conclusion. For as
   salt seasons all food and nothing is so pleasant as to please the
   palate without it: so the bishop is the seasoning of the whole world
   and of his own Church, and if he lose his savour through the denial of
   truth, or through heresy, or lust, or, to comprehend all in one word,
   through sin of any kind, by what other can he be seasoned, when he was
   the seasoning of all? The priest, we know, offers his oblation for the
   layman, lays his hand upon him when submissive, invokes the return of
   the Holy Spirit, and thus, after inviting the prayers of the people,
   reconciles to the altar him who had been delivered to Satan for the
   destruction of the flesh that the spirit might he saved; nor does he
   restore one member to health until all the members have wept together
   with him. For a father easily pardons his son, when the mother entreats
   for her offspring. If then it is by the priestly order that a penitent
   layman is restored to the Church, and pardon follows where sorrow has
   gone before, it is clear that a priest who has been removed from his
   order cannot be restored to the place he has forfeited, because either
   he will be a penitent and then he cannot be a priest, or if he
   continues to hold office he cannot be brought back to the Church by
   penitential discipline. Will you dare to spoil the savour of the Church
   with the salt which has lost its savour? Will you replace at the altar
   the man who having been cast out ought to lie in the mire and be
   trodden under foot by all men? What then will become of the Apostle's
   command, [4058] "The bishop must be blameless as God's steward"? And
   again, [4059] "But let a man prove himself, and so let him come." What
   becomes of our Lord's intimation, [4060] "Neither cast your pearls
   before the swine"? But if you understand the words as a general
   admonition, how much more must care be exercised in the case of priests
   when so much precaution is taken where the laity are concerned? [4061]
   "Depart, I pray you," says the Lord by Moses, "from the tents of these
   wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all
   their sins." And again in the Minor Prophets, [4062] "Their sacrifices
   shall be unto them as the bread of mourners; all that eat thereof shall
   be polluted." And in the Gospel the Lord says, [4063] "The lamp of the
   body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall
   be full of light." For when the bishop preaches the true faith the
   darkness is scattered from the hearts of all. And he gives the reason,
   [4064] "Neither do men light a lamp, and put it under the bushel, but
   on the stand; and it shineth unto all that are in the house." That is,
   God's motive for lighting the fire of His knowledge in the bishop is
   that he may not shine for himself only, but for the common benefit. And
   in the next sentence [4065] "If," says he, "thine eye be evil, thy
   whole body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in
   thee be darkness, how great is the darkness!" And rightly; for since
   the bishop is appointed in the Church that he may restrain the people
   from error, how great will the error of the people be when he himself
   who teaches errs. How can he remit sins, who is himself a sinner? How
   can an impious man make a man holy? How shall the light enter into me,
   when my eye is blind? O misery! Antichrist's disciple governs the
   Church of Christ. And what are we to think of the words, [4066] "No man
   can serve two masters"? And that too [4067] "What communion hath light
   and darkness? And what concord hath Christ with Belial?" In the old
   testament we read, [4068] "No man that hath a blemish shall come nigh
   to offer the offerings of the Lord." And again, [4069] "Let the priests
   who come nigh to the Lord their God be clean, lest haply the Lord
   forsake them." And in the same place, [4070] "And when they draw nigh
   to minister in holy things, let them not bring sin upon themselves,
   lest they die." And there are many other passages which it would be an
   endless task to detail, and which I omit for the sake of brevity. For
   it is not the number of proofs that avails, but their weight. And all
   this proves that you with a little leaven have corrupted the whole lump
   of the Church, and receive the Eucharist to-day from the hand of one
   whom yesterday you loathed like an idol.

   6. O. Your memory has served you, and you have certainly given us at
   great length many quotations from the sacred books: but after going all
   round the wood, you are caught in my hunting-nets. Let the case be as
   you would have it, that an Arian bishop is the enemy of Christ, let him
   be the salt that has lost its savour, let him be a lamp without flame,
   let him be an eye without a pupil: no doubt your argument will take you
   thus far--that he cannot salt another who himself has no salt: a blind
   man cannot enlighten others, nor set them on fire when his own light
   has gone out. But why, when you swallow food which he has seasoned, do
   you reproach the seasoned with being saltless? Your Church is bright
   with his flame, and do you accuse his lamp of being extinguished? He
   gives you eyes, and are you blind? Wherefore, I pray you, either give
   him the power of sacrificing since you approve his baptism, or reject
   his baptism if you do not think him a priest. For it is impossible that
   he who is holy in baptism should be a sinner at the altar.

   L. But when I receive a lay penitent, it is with laying on of hands,
   and invocation of the Holy Spirit, for I know that the Holy Spirit
   cannot be given by heretics.

   O. All the paths of your propositions lead to the same meeting-point,
   and it is with you as with the frightened deer--while you fly from the
   feathers fluttering in the wind, you become entangled in the strongest
   of nets. For seeing that a man, baptized in the name of the Father and
   the Son and the Holy Ghost, becomes a temple of the Lord, and that
   while the old abode is destroyed a new shrine is built for the Trinity,
   how can you say that sins can be remitted among the Arians without the
   coming of the Holy Ghost? How is a soul purged from its former stains
   which has not the Holy Ghost? For it is not mere water which washes the
   soul, but it is itself first purified by the Spirit that it may be able
   to spiritually wash the souls of men. [4071] "The Spirit of the Lord,"
   says Moses, "moved upon the face of the waters," from which it appears
   that there is no baptism without the Holy Ghost. Bethesda, the pool in
   Judea, could not cure the limbs of those who suffered from bodily
   weakness without the advent of an angel, [4072] and do you venture to
   bring me a soul washed with simple water, as though it had just come
   from the bath? Our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, of whom it is less
   correct to say that He was cleansed by washing than that by the washing
   of Himself He cleansed all waters, no sooner raised His head from the
   stream than He received the Holy Ghost. Not that He ever was without
   the Holy Ghost, inasmuch as He was born in the flesh through the Holy
   Ghost; but in order to prove that to be the true baptism by which the
   Holy Ghost comes. So then if an Arian cannot give the Holy Spirit, he
   cannot even baptize, because there is no baptism of the Church without
   the Holy Spirit. And you, when you receive a person baptized by an
   Arian and afterwards invoke the Holy Ghost, ought either to baptize
   him, because without the Holy Ghost he could not be baptized, or, if he
   was baptized in the Spirit, you must not invoke the Holy Ghost for your
   convert who received Him at the time of baptism.

   7. L. Pray tell me, have you not read [4073] in the Acts of the
   Apostles that those who had already been baptized by John, on their
   saying in reply to the Apostle's question that they had not even heard
   what the Holy Ghost was, afterwards obtained the Holy Ghost? Whence it
   is clear that it is possible to be baptized, and yet not to have the
   Holy Ghost.

   O. I do not think that those who form our audience are so ignorant of
   the sacred books that many words are needed to settle this little
   question. But before I say anything in support of my assertion, listen
   while I point out what confusion, upon your view, is introduced into
   Scripture. What do we mean by saying that John in his baptism could not
   give the Holy Spirit to others, yet gave him to Christ? And who is that
   John? [4074] "The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make ye ready
   the way of the Lord, make his paths straight." He who used to say,
   [4075] "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the
   world": I say too little, he who from his mother's womb cried out,
   [4076] "And whence is this to me that the mother of my Lord should come
   unto me," did he not give the Holy Ghost? And did [4077] Ananias give
   him to Paul? It perhaps looks like boldness in me to prefer him to all
   other men. Hear then the words of our Lord, [4078] "Among them that are
   born of women there hath not arisen a greater than John the Baptist."
   For no prophet had the good fortune both to announce the coming of
   Christ, and to point Him out with the finger. And what necessity is
   there for me to dwell upon the praises of so illustrious a man when God
   the Father even calls him an angel? [4079] "Behold, I send my messenger
   (angel) before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee." He
   must have been an angel who after lodging in his mother's womb at once
   began to frequent the desert wilds, and while still an infant played
   with serpents; who, when his eyes had once gazed on Christ thought
   nothing else worth looking at; who exercised his voice, worthy of a
   messenger of God, in the words of the Lord, which are sweeter than
   honey and the honey-comb. And, to delay my question no further, thus it
   behooved [4080] the Forerunner of the Lord to grow up. Now is it
   possible that a man of such character and renown did not give the Holy
   Ghost, while Cornelius the centurion received Him before baptism? Tell
   me, pray, why could he not give Him? You don't know? Then listen to the
   teaching of Scripture: the baptism of John did not so much consist in
   the forgiveness of sins as in being a baptism of repentance for the
   remission of sins, that is, for a future remission, which was to follow
   through the sanctification of Christ. For it is written, [4081] "John
   came, who baptized in the wilderness, and preached the baptism of
   repentance unto remission of sins." And soon after, [4082] "And they
   were baptized of him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins." For
   as he himself preceded Christ as His forerunner, so also his baptism
   was the prelude to the Lord's baptism. [4083] "He that is of the
   earth," he said, "speaketh of the earth; he that cometh from heaven is
   above all." And again, [4084] "I indeed baptize you with water, he
   shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost." But if John, as he himself
   confessed, did not baptize with the Spirit, it follows that he did not
   forgive sins either, for no man has his sins remitted without the Holy
   Ghost. Or if you contentiously argue that, because the baptism of John
   was from heaven, therefore sins were forgiven by it, show me what more
   there is for us to get in Christ's baptism. Because it forgives sins,
   it releases from Gehenna. Because it releases from Gehenna, it is
   perfect. But no baptism can be called perfect except that which depends
   on the cross and resurrection of Christ. Thus, although John himself
   said, [4085] "He must increase, but I must decrease," in your perverse
   scrupulosity you give more than is due to the baptism of the servant,
   and destroy that of the master to which you leave no more than to the
   other. What is the drift of your assertion? Just this--it does not
   strike you as strange that those who had been baptized by John, should
   afterwards by the laying on of hands receive the Holy Ghost, although
   it is evident that they did not obtain even remission of sins apart
   from the faith which was to follow. But you who receive a person
   baptized by the Arians and allow him to have perfect baptism, after
   that admission do you invoke the Holy Ghost as if this were still some
   slight defect, whereas there is no baptism of Christ without the Holy
   Ghost? But I have wandered too far, and when I might have met my
   opponent face to face and repelled his attack, I have only thrown a few
   light darts from a distance. The baptism of John was so far imperfect
   that it is plain they who had been baptized by him were afterwards
   baptized with the baptism of Christ. For thus the history relates,
   [4086] "And it came to pass that while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul
   having passed through the upper country came to Ephesus, and found
   certain disciples: and he said unto them, Did ye receive the Holy Ghost
   when ye believed? And they said unto him, Nay, we did not so much as
   hear whether the Holy Ghost was given. And he said, Into what then were
   ye baptized? And they said, Into John's baptism. And Paul said, John
   baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that
   they should believe on Him which should come after him, that is, on
   Jesus. And when they heard this, they were baptized into the name of
   the Lord Jesus: And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, immediately
   the Holy Ghost fell on them." If then they were baptized with the true
   and lawful baptism of the Church, and thus received the Holy Ghost: do
   you follow the apostles and baptize those who have not had Christian
   baptism, and you will be able to invoke the Holy Ghost.

   8. L. Thirsty men in their dreams eagerly gulp down the water of the
   stream, and the more they drink the thirstier they are. In the same way
   you appear to me to have searched everywhere for arguments against the
   point I raised, and yet to be as far as ever from being satisfied.
   Don't you know that the laying on of hands after baptism and then the
   invocation of the Holy Spirit is a custom of the Churches? Do you
   demand Scripture proof? You may find it in the Acts of the Apostles.
   And even if it did not rest on the authority of Scripture the consensus
   of the whole world in this respect would have the force of a command.
   For many other observances of the Churches, which are due to tradition,
   have acquired the authority of the written law, as for instance [4087]
   the practice of dipping the head three times in the laver, and then,
   after leaving the water, of [4088] tasting mingled milk and honey in
   representation of infancy; [4089] and, again, the practices of standing
   up in worship on the Lord's day, and ceasing from fasting every
   Pentecost; and there are many other unwritten practices which have won
   their place through reason and custom. So you see we follow the
   practice of the Church, although it may be clear that a person was
   baptized before the Spirit was invoked.

   9. O. I do not deny that it is the practice of the Churches in the case
   of those who living far from the greater towns have been baptized by
   presbyters and deacons, for the bishop to visit them, and by the laying
   on of hands to invoke the Holy Ghost upon them. But how shall I
   describe your habit of applying the laws of the Church to heretics, and
   of exposing the virgin entrusted to you in the brothels of harlots? If
   a bishop lays his hands on men he lays them on those who have been
   baptized in the right faith, and who have believed that the Father,
   Son, and Holy Ghost, are three persons, but one essence. But an Arian
   has no faith but this (close your ears, my hearers, that you may not be
   defiled by words so grossly impious), that the Father alone is very
   God, and that Jesus Christ our Saviour is a [4090] creature, and [4091]
   the Holy Ghost the Servant of both. How can he then receive the Holy
   Ghost from the Church, who has not yet obtained remission of sins? For
   the Holy Ghost must have a clean abode: nor will He become a dweller in
   that temple which has not for its chief priest the true faith. But if
   you now ask how it is that a person baptized in the Church does not
   receive the Holy Ghost, Whom we declare to be given in true baptism,
   except by the hands of the bishop, let me tell you that our authority
   for the rule is the fact that after our Lord's ascension the Holy Ghost
   descended upon the Apostles. And in many places we find it the
   practice, more by way of honouring the [4092] episcopate than from any
   compulsory law. Otherwise, if the Holy Ghost descends only at the
   bishop's prayer, they are greatly to be pitied who in isolated houses,
   or in forts, or retired places, after being baptized by the presbyters
   and deacons have fallen asleep before the bishop's visitation. The
   well-being of a Church depends upon the dignity of its chief-priest,
   and unless some extraordinary and unique functions be assigned to him,
   we shall have as many schisms in the Churches as there are priests.
   Hence it is that without ordination and the bishop's license neither
   presbyter nor deacon has the power to baptize. And yet, if necessity so
   be, we know that even laymen may, and frequently do, baptize. For as a
   man receives, so too he can give; for it will hardly be said that we
   must believe that the eunuch whom Philip [4093] baptized lacked the
   Holy Spirit. The Scripture thus speaks concerning him, "And they both
   went down into the water; and Philip baptized him." And on leaving the
   water, "The Holy Spirit fell upon the eunuch." You may perhaps think
   that we ought to set against this the passage in which we read, "Now
   when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had
   received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John: who, when
   they were come down, prayed for them that they might receive the Holy
   Ghost: for as yet he was fallen upon none of them." But why this was,
   the context tells us,--"Only they had been baptized into the name of
   the Lord Jesus. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received
   the Holy Ghost." And if you here say that you do the same, because the
   heretics have not baptized into the Holy Spirit, I must remind you that
   Philip was not separated from the Apostles, but belonged to the same
   Church and preached the same Lord Jesus Christ: that he was without
   question a deacon of those who afterwards laid their hands on his
   converts. But when you say that the Arians have not a Church, but a
   synagogue, and that their clergy do not worship God but creatures and
   idols, how can you maintain that you ought to act upon the same
   principle in cases so totally different?

   L. You repel my attack in front with vigour and firmness: but you are
   smitten in the rear and leave your back exposed to the darts. Let us
   even grant that the Arians have no baptism, and therefore that the Holy
   Ghost cannot be given by them, because they themselves have not yet
   received remission of sins; this altogether makes for victory on my
   side, and all your argumentative wrestling is but laborious toil to
   give me the conqueror's palm. An Arian has no baptism; how is it then
   that he has the episcopate? There is not even a layman among them, how
   can there be a bishop? I may not receive a beggar, do you receive a
   king? You surrender your camp to the enemy, and are we to reject one of
   their deserters?

   11. O. If you remember what has been said you would know that you have
   been already answered; but in yielding to the love of contradiction you
   have wandered from the subject, like those persons who are talkative
   rather than eloquent, and who, when they cannot argue, still continue
   to wrangle. On the present occasion it is not my aim to either accuse
   or defend the Arians, but rather to get safely past the turning-post of
   the race, and to maintain that we receive a bishop for the same reason
   that you receive a layman. If you grant forgiveness to the erring, I
   too pardon the penitent. If he that baptizes a person into our belief
   has had no injurious effect upon the person baptized, it follows that
   he who consecrates a bishop in the same faith causes no defilement to
   the person consecrated. Heresy is subtle, and therefore the
   simple-minded are easily deceived. To be deceived is the common lot of
   both layman and bishop. But you say, a bishop could not have been
   mistaken. The truth is, men are elected to the episcopate who come from
   the bosom of Plato and Aristophanes. How many can you find among them
   who are not fully instructed in these writers? Indeed all, whoever they
   may be, that are ordained at the present day from among the literate
   class make it their study not how to seek out the marrow of Scripture,
   but how to tickle the ears of the people with the flowers of rhetoric.
   We must further add that the Arian heresy goes hand in hand with the
   wisdom of the world, and [4094] borrows its streams of argument from
   the fountains of Aristotle. And so we will act like children when they
   try to outdo one another--whatever you say I will say: what you assert,
   I will assert: whatever you deny, I will deny. We allow that an Arian
   may baptize; then he must be a bishop. [4095] If we agree that Arian
   baptism is invalid, you must reject the layman, and I must not accept
   the bishop. I will follow you wherever you go; we shall either stick in
   the mud together, or shall get out together.

   12. L. We pardon a layman because, when he was baptized, he had a
   sincere impression that he was joining the Church. He believed and was
   baptized in accordance with his faith.

   O. That is something new for a man to be made a Christian by one who is
   not a Christian. When he joined the Arians into what faith was he
   baptized? Of course into that which the Arians held. If on the other
   hand we are to suppose that his own faith was correct, but that he was
   knowingly baptized by heretics, he does not deserve the indulgence we
   grant to the erring. But it is quite absurd to imagine that, going as a
   pupil to the master, he understands his art before he has been taught.
   Can you suppose that a man who has just turned from worshipping idols
   knows Christ better than his teacher does? If you say, he sincerely
   believed in the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and therefore
   obtained baptism, what, let me ask, is the meaning of being sincerely
   ignorant of what one believes? He sincerely believed. What did he
   believe? Surely when he heard the three names, he believed in three
   Gods, and was an idolater; or by the three titles he was led to believe
   in a God with three names, and so fell into the [4096] Sabellian
   heresy. Or he was perhaps trained by the Arians to believe that there
   is one true God, the Father, but that the Son and the Holy Spirit are
   creatures. What else he may have believed, I know not: for we can
   hardly think that a man brought up in the Capitol would have learnt the
   doctrine of the co-essential Trinity. He would have known in that case
   that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are not divided in nature, but in
   person. He would have known also that the name of Son was implied in
   that of Father and the name of Father in that of Son. It is ridiculous
   to assert that any one can dispute concerning the faith before he
   believes it; that he understands a mystery before he has been
   initiated; that the baptizer and the baptized hold different views
   respecting God. Besides, it is the custom at baptism to ask, after the
   confession of faith in the Trinity, do you believe in Holy Church? Do
   you believe in the remission of sins? What Church do you say he
   believed in? The Church of the Arians? But they have no Church. In
   ours? But the man was not baptized into it: he could not believe in
   that whereof he was ignorant.

   L. I see that you can prattle cleverly about each point that I raise;
   and when we let fly a dart you elude it by a harangue which serves you
   for a shield; I will therefore hurl a single spear which will be strong
   enough to pierce your defences and the hail-storm of your words. I
   won't allow strength any longer to be overcome by artifice. Even a
   layman baptized without the Church, if he be baptized according to the
   faith, is received only as a penitent: but a bishop either does no
   penance and remains a bishop, or, if he does penance he ceases to be a
   bishop. Wherefore we do right both in welcoming the penitent layman,
   and in rejecting the bishop, if he wishes to continue in his office.

   O. An arrow which is discharged from the tight-drawn bow is not easy to
   avoid, for it reaches him at whom it was aimed before the shield can be
   raised to stop it. On the other hand your propositions are pointless
   and therefore cannot pierce an opponent. The spear then which you have
   hurled with all your might and about which you speak such threatening
   words, I turn aside, as the saying is, with my little finger. The point
   in dispute is not merely whether a bishop is incapable of penitence and
   a layman capable, but whether a heretic has received valid baptism. If
   he has not (and this follows from your position), how can he be a
   penitent, before he is a Christian? Show me that a layman coming from
   the Arians has valid baptism, and then I will not deny him penitence.
   But if he is not a Christian, if he had no priest to make him a
   Christian, how can he do penance when he is not yet a believer?

   14. L. I beseech you lay aside the methods of the philosophers and let
   us talk with Christian simplicity; that is, if you are willing to
   follow not the logicians, but the Galilean fishermen. Does it seem
   right to you that an Arian should be a bishop?

   O. You prove him a bishop because you receive those he has baptized.
   And it is here that you are to blame:--Why are there walls of
   separation between us when we are at one in faith and in receiving
   Arians?

   L. I asked you before not to talk like a philosopher, but like a
   Christian.

   O. Do you wish to learn, or to argue?

   L. Of course I argue because I want to know the reason for what you do.

   O. If you argue, you have already had an answer. I receive an Arian
   bishop for the same reason that you receive a person who is only
   baptized. If you wish to learn, come over to my side: for an opponent
   must be overcome, it is only a disciple who can be taught.

   L. Before I can be a disciple, I must hear one preach whom I feel to be
   my master.

   O. You are not dealing quite fairly: you wish me to be your teacher on
   the terms that you may treat me as an opponent whenever you please. I
   will teach you therefore in the same spirit. We agree in faith, we
   agree in receiving heretics, let us also be at one in our terms of
   communion.

   L. That is not teaching, but arguing.

   O. As you ask for peace with a shield in your hand, I also must carry
   my olive branch with a sword grafted in it.

   L. I drop my hands in token of submission. You are conqueror. But in
   laying down my arms, I ask the meaning of the oath you force me to
   take.

   O. Certainly, but first I congratulate you, and thank Christ my God for
   your good dispositions which have made you turn from the unsavoury
   teaching of the [4097] Sardinians to that which the whole world
   approves as true; and no longer say as some do, [4098] "Help, Lord; for
   the godly man teaseth." By their impious words they make of none effect
   the cross of Christ, subject the Son of God to the devil, and would
   have us now understand the Lord's lamentation over sinners to apply to
   all men, [4099] "What profit is there in my blood, when I go down to
   the pit?" But God forbid that our Lord should have died in vain. [4100]
   The strong man is bound, and his goods are spoiled. What the Father
   says is fulfilled, [4101] "Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations
   for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
   possession." [4102] "Then the channels of water appeared, and the
   foundations of the world were laid bare." [4103] "In them hath he set a
   tabernacle for the sun, and there is nothing hid from the heat
   thereof." The Psalmist fully possessed by God sings, [4104] "The swords
   of the enemy are come to an end, and the cities which thou hast
   overthrown."

   15. And what is the position, I should like to know, of those
   excessively scrupulous, or rather excessively profane persons, who
   assert that there are more synagogues than Churches? How is it that the
   devil's kingdoms have been destroyed, and now at last in the
   consummation of the ages, the idols have fallen? If Christ has no
   Church, or if he has one only, in Sardinia, he has grown very poor. And
   if Satan owns Britain, Gaul, the East, the races of India, barbarous
   nations, and the whole world at the same time, how is it that the
   trophies of the cross have been collected in a mere corner of the
   earth? Christ's powerful opponent, forsooth, gave over to him the
   [4105] serpent of Spain: he disdained to own a poor province and its
   half-starved inhabitants. If they flatter themselves that they have on
   their side that verse of the gospel, [4106] "Howbeit when the Son of
   man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?" let me remind them that
   the faith in question is that of which the Lord himself said, [4107]
   "Thy faith hath made thee whole." And elsewhere, of the centurion,
   [4108] "I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel." And again,
   to the Apostles, [4109] "Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?" In
   another place also, [4110] "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard
   seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place,
   and it shall remove." For neither the centurion nor that poor woman who
   for twelve years was wasting away with a bloody flux, had believed in
   the mysteries of the Trinity, for these were revealed to the Apostles
   after the resurrection of Christ; so that the faith of such as believe
   in the mystery of the Trinity might have its due preeminence: but it
   was her singleness of mind and her devotion to her God that met with
   our Lord's approval: [4111] "For she said within herself, If I do but
   touch his garment, I shall be made whole." This is the faith which our
   Lord said was seldom found. This is the faith which even in the case of
   those who believe aright is hard to find in perfection. [4112]
   "According to your faith, be it done unto you," says God. I do not,
   indeed, like the sound of those words. For if it be done unto me
   according to my faith, I shall perish. And yet I certainly believe in
   God the Father, I believe in God the Son, and I believe in God the Holy
   Ghost. I believe in one God; nevertheless, I would not have it done
   unto me according to my faith. For the enemy often comes, and sows
   tares in the Lord's harvest. I do not mean to imply that anything is
   greater than the purity of heart which believes that mystery; but
   undoubted faith towards God it is hard indeed to find. To make my
   meaning plain, let us suppose a case:--I stand to pray; I could not
   pray, if I did not believe; but if I really believed, I should cleanse
   that heart of mine with which God is seen, I should beat my hands upon
   my breast, the tears would stream down my cheeks, my body would
   shudder, my face grow pale, I should lie at my Lord's feet, weep over
   them, and wipe them with my hair, I should cling to the cross and not
   let go my hold until I obtained mercy. But, as it is, frequently in my
   prayers I am either walking in the arcades, or calculating my interest,
   or am carried away by base thoughts, so as to be occupied with things
   the mere mention of which makes me blush. Where is our faith? Are we to
   suppose that it was thus that Jonah prayed? or the three youths? or
   Daniel in the lion's den? or the robber on the cross? I have given
   these illustrations that you may understand my meaning. But let every
   one commune with his own heart, and he will find throughout the whole
   of life how rare a thing it is to find a soul so faithful that it does
   nothing through the love of glory, nothing on account of the petty
   gossip of men. For he who fasts does not as an immediate consequence
   fast unto God, nor he who holds out his hand to a poor man, lend to the
   Lord. Vice is next-door neighbour to virtue. It is hard to rest content
   with God alone for judge.

   16. L. I was reserving that passage until last, and you have
   anticipated my question about it. Almost all our party, or rather not
   mine any more, use it as a sort of controversial battering ram: as such
   I am exceedingly glad to see it broken to pieces and pulverized. But
   will you be so good as to fully explain to me, not in the character of
   an opponent but of a disciple, why it is that the Church receives those
   who come from the Arians? The truth is I am unable to answer you a
   word, but I do not yet give a hearty assent to what you say.

   17. O. When Constantius was on the throne and Eusebius and Hypatius
   were Consuls, there was composed, under the pretext of unity and faith,
   [4113] an unfaithful creed, as it is now acknowledged to have been. For
   at that time, nothing seemed so characteristic of piety, nothing so
   befitting a servant of God, as to follow after unity, and to shun
   separation from communion with the rest of the world. And all the more
   because the current profession of faith no longer exhibited on the face
   of it anything profane. "We believe," said they, "in one true God, the
   Father Almighty. This we also confess: We believe in the only begotten
   Son of God, who, before all worlds, and before all their origins,
   [4114] was born of God. The only-begotten Son, moreover, we believe to
   be born alone of the Father alone, God of God, like to his Father who
   begot Him, according to the Scriptures; whose birth no one knows, but
   the Father alone who begot Him." Do we find any such words inserted
   here as [4115] "There was a time, when he was not?" Or, "The Son of God
   is a creature though not made of things which exist." No. This is
   surely the perfection of faith to say we believe Him to be God of God.
   Moreover, they called Him the only begotten, "born alone of the
   Father." What is the meaning of born? Surely, not made. His birth
   removed all suspicion of His being a creature. They added further, "Who
   came down from heaven, was conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of the
   Virgin Mary, crucified by Pontius Pilate, rose again the third day from
   the dead, ascended into heaven, sitteth at the right hand of the
   Father, who will come to judge the quick and the dead." There was the
   ring of piety in the words, and no one thought that poison was mingled
   with the honey of such a proclamation.

   18. As regards the term [4116] Usia, it was not rejected without a show
   of reason for so doing. [4117] "Because it is not found in the
   Scriptures," they said, "and its novelty is a stumbling-block to many,
   we have thought it best to dispense with it." The bishops were not
   anxious about the name, so long as that which it implied was secured.
   Lastly, at the very time when rumour was rife that there had been some
   insincerity in the statement of the faith, Valens, bishop of Mursa, who
   had drawn it up, in the presence of Taurus the pretorian prefect who
   attended the Synod by imperial command, declared that he was not an
   Arian, and that he utterly abhorred their blasphemies. However, the
   thing had been done in secret, and it had not extinguished the general
   feeling. So on another day, when crowds of bishops and laymen came
   together in the Church at Ariminum, Muzonius, bishop of the province of
   Byzacena, to whom by reason of seniority the first rank was assigned by
   all, spoke as follows: "One of our number has been authorized to read
   to you, reverend fathers, what reports are being spread and have
   reached us, so that the evil opinions which ought to grate upon our
   ears and be banished from our hearts may be condemned with one voice by
   us all." The whole body of bishops replied, Agreed. And so when
   Claudius, bishop of the province of Picenum, at the request of all
   present, began to read the blasphemies attributed to Valens, Valens
   denied they were his and cried aloud, "If anyone denies Christ our
   Lord, the Son of God, begotten of the Father before the worlds, let him
   be anathema." There was a general chorus of approval, "Let him be
   anathema." [4118] "If anyone denies that the Son is like the Father
   according to the Scriptures, let him be anathema." All replied, "Let
   him be anathema." "If anyone does not say that the Son of God is
   co-eternal with the Father, let him be anathema." There was again a
   chorus of approval, "Let him be anathema." "If anyone says that the Son
   of God is a creature, like other creatures, let him be anathema." The
   answer was the same, "Let him be anathema." "If anyone says that the
   Son was of no existing things, yet not of God the Father, let him be
   anathema." All shouted together, "Let him be anathema." "If anyone
   says, There was a time when the Son was not, let him be anathema." At
   this point all the bishops and the whole Church together received the
   words of Valens with clapping of hands and stamping of feet. And if
   anyone thinks we have invented the story let him examine the public
   records. At all events the muniment-boxes of the Churches are full of
   it, and the circumstance is fresh in men's memory. Some of those who
   took part in the Synod are still alive, and the Arians themselves (a
   fact which may put the truth beyond dispute) do not deny the accuracy
   of our account. When, therefore, all extolled Valens to the sky and
   penitently condemned themselves for having suspected him, the same
   Claudius who before had begun to read, said "There are still a few
   points which have escaped the notice of my lord and brother Valens; if
   it seem good to you, let us, in order to remove all scruples, pass a
   general vote of censure upon them. If anyone says that the Son of God
   was indeed before all worlds but was by no means before all time, so
   that he puts some thing before Him, let him be anathema." And many
   other things which had a suspicious look were condemned by Valens when
   Claudius recited them. If anyone wishes to learn more about them he
   will find the account in the acts of the Synod of Ariminum, the source
   from which I have myself drawn them.

   19. After these proceedings the Council was dissolved. All returned in
   gladness to their own provinces. For the Emperor and all good men had
   one and the same aim, that the East and West should be knit together by
   the bond of fellowship. But wickedness does not long lie hid, and the
   sore that is healed superficially before the bad humour has been worked
   off breaks out again. Valens and [4119] Ursacius and others associated
   with them in their wickedness, eminent Christian bishops of course,
   began to wave their palms, and to say they had not denied that He was a
   creature, but that He was like other creatures. At that moment the term
   Usia was abolished: the Nicene Faith stood condemned by acclamation.
   The whole world groaned, and was astonished to find itself Arian. Some,
   therefore, remained in their own communion, others began to send
   letters to those Confessors who as adherents of Athanasius were in
   exile; several despairingly bewailed the better relations into which
   they had entered. But a few, true to human nature, defended their
   mistake as an exhibition of wisdom. The ship of the Apostles was in
   peril, she was driven by the wind, her sides beaten with the waves: no
   hope was now left. But the Lord awoke and bade the tempest cease; the
   [4120] beast died, and there was a calm once again. To speak more
   plainly, all the bishops who had been banished from their sees, by the
   clemency of the new [4121] emperor returned to their Churches. Then
   Egypt welcomed the [4122] triumphant Athanasius; then [4123] Hilary
   returned from the battle to the embrace of the Church of Gaul; then
   [4124] Eusebius returned and Italy laid aside her mourning weeds. The
   bishops who had been caught in the snare at Ariminum and had
   unwittingly come to be reported of as heretics, began to assemble,
   while they called the Body of our Lord and all that is holy in the
   Church to witness that they had not a suspicion of anything faulty in
   their own faith. We thought, said they, the words were to be taken in
   their natural meaning, and we had no suspicion that in the Church of
   God, the very home of simplicity and sincerity in the confession of
   truth, one thing could be kept secret in the heart, another uttered by
   the lips. We thought too well of bad men and were deceived. We did not
   suppose that the bishops of Christ were fighting against Christ. There
   was much besides which they said with tears, but I pass it over for
   brevity's sake. They were ready to condemn their [4125] former
   subscription as well as all the blasphemies of the Arians. Here I ask
   our excessively scrupulous friends what they think ought to have been
   done with those who made this Confession? Deprive the old bishops, they
   will say, and ordain new ones. The plan was tried. But how many whose
   conscience does not condemn them will allow themselves to be deprived.
   Particularly when all the people who loved their bishops flocked
   together, ready to stone and slay those who attempted to deprive them.
   The bishops should, it may be said, have kept to themselves within
   their own communion. That is to say, with senseless cruelty they would
   have surrendered the whole world to the devil. Why condemn those who
   were not Arians? Why rend the Church when it was continuing in the
   harmony of the faith? Lastly, were they by obstinacy to make Arians of
   orthodox believers? We know that at the Council of Nicæa, which was
   assembled on account of the Arian perfidy, eight Arian bishops were
   welcomed, and there is not a bishop in the world at the present day
   whose ordination is not dependent on that Council. This being so, how
   could they act in opposition to it, when their loyalty to it had cost
   them the pain of exile?

   20. L. Were Arians really then received after all? Pray tell me who
   they were.

   O. [4126] Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, [4127] Theognis, bishop of
   Nicæa, Saras, at the time presbyter of Libya, [4128] Eusebius, bishop
   of Cæsarea in Palestine, and others whom it would be tedious to
   enumerate; Arius also, the presbyter, the original source of all the
   trouble; Euzoius the deacon, [4129] who succeeded Eudoxius as bishop of
   Antioch, and Achillas, the reader. These three who were clerics of the
   Church of Alexandria were the originators of the heresy.

   L. Suppose a person were to deny that they were welcomed back, how is
   he to be refuted?

   O. There are men still living who took part in that Council. And if
   that is not enough, because owing to the time that has elapsed they are
   but few, and it is impossible for witnesses to be everywhere, if we
   read the acts and names of the bishops of the Council of Nicæa, we find
   that those who we saw just now were welcomed back, did subscribe the
   homoousion along with the rest.

   L. Will you point out how, after the Council of Nicæa, they relapsed
   into their unfaithfulness?

   O. A good suggestion, for unbelievers are in the habit of shutting
   their eyes and denying that things which they dislike ever happened.
   But how could they afterwards do anything but relapse, when it was
   owing to them that the Council was convened, and their letters and
   impious treatises which were published before the Council, remain even
   to the present day? Seeing, therefore, that at that time three hundred
   bishops or more welcomed a few men whom they might have rejected
   without injury to the Church, I am surprised that certain persons, who
   are certainly upholders of the faith of Nicæa, are so harsh as to think
   that [4130] three Confessors returning from exile were not bound in the
   interests of the world's salvation to do what so many illustrious men
   did of their own accord. But, to go back to our starting point, on the
   return of the Confessors it was determined, in a synod afterwards
   [4131] held at Alexandria, that, the authors of the heresy excepted
   (who could not be excused on the ground of error), penitents should be
   admitted to communion with the Church: not that they who had been
   heretics could be bishops, but because it was clear that those who were
   received had not been heretics. The West assented to this decision, and
   it was through this conclusion, which the necessities of the times
   demanded, that the world was snatched from the jaws of Satan. I have
   reached a very difficult subject, where I am compelled against my
   wishes and my purpose, to think somewhat otherwise of that saintly man
   Lucifer than his merits demand, and my own courtesy requires. But what
   am I to do? Truth opens my mouth and urges my reluctant tongue to utter
   the thoughts of my heart. At such a crisis of the Church, when the
   wolves were wildly raging, he separated off a few sheep and abandoned
   the remnant of the flock. He himself was a good shepherd, but he was
   leaving a vast spoil to the beasts of prey. I take no notice of reports
   originating with certain evil speakers, though maintained by them to be
   authenticated facts; such as that he acted thus through the love of
   glory, and the desire of handing down his name to posterity; or again
   that he was influenced by the grudge he bore against Eusebius on
   account of the [4132] quarrel at Antioch. I believe none of these
   reports in the case of such a man; and this I will constantly affirm
   even now--that the difference between us and him is one of words, not
   of things, if he really does receive those who have been baptized by
   the Arians.

   21. L. The account I used before to hear given of these things was
   widely different, and, as I now think, better calculated to promote
   error than hope. But I thank Christ my God for pouring into my heart
   the light of truth, that I might no longer profanely call the Church,
   which is His Virgin, the harlot of the devil. There is one other point
   I should like you to explain. What are we to say about [4133] Hilary
   who does not receive even those who have been baptized by the Arians?

   O. Since Hilary when he left the Church was only a deacon, and since
   the Church is to him, though to him alone, a mere worldly multitude, he
   can neither duly celebrate the Eucharist, for he has no bishops or
   priests, nor can he give baptism without the Eucharist. And since the
   man is now dead, inasmuch as he was a deacon and could ordain no one to
   follow him, his sect died with him. For there is no such thing as a
   Church without bishops. But passing over a few very insignificant
   persons who are in their own esteem both laymen and bishops, let me
   point out to you what views we should hold respecting the Church at
   large.

   L. You have settled a great question in three words, as the saying is,
   and indeed while you speak, I feel that I am on your side. But when you
   stop, some old misgivings arise as to why we receive those who have
   been baptized by heretics.

   O. That is just what I had in mind when I said I would point out what
   views we ought to hold concerning the Church at large. For many are
   exercised by the misgivings you speak of. I shall perhaps be tedious in
   my explanation, but it is worth while if the truth gains.

   22. Noah's ark was a type of the Church, as the Apostle Peter says--
   [4134] "In Noah's ark few, that is, eight souls, were saved through
   water: which also after a true likeness doth now save us, even
   baptism." As in the ark there were all kinds of animals, so also in the
   Church there are men of all races and characters. As in the one there
   was the leopard with the kids, the wolf with the lambs, so in the other
   there are found the righteous and sinners, that is, [4135] vessels of
   gold and silver with those of wood and of earth. The ark had its rooms:
   the Church has many mansions. Eight souls were saved in Noah's ark. And
   [4136] Ecclesiastes bids us "give a portion to seven yea, even unto
   eight," that is to believe both Testaments. This is why some psalms
   bear the inscription [4137] for the octave, and why the one hundred and
   nineteenth psalm is divided into portions of eight verses each
   beginning with its own letter for the instruction of the righteous. The
   beatitudes which our Lord spoke to his disciples on the mountain,
   thereby delineating the Church, are eight. And Ezekiel for the building
   of the temple employs the number eight. And you will find many other
   things expressed in the same way in the Scriptures. The raven also is
   sent forth from the ark but does not return, and afterwards the dove
   announces peace to the earth. So also in the Church's baptism, that
   most unclean bird the devil is expelled, and the dove of the Holy
   Spirit announces peace to our earth. The construction of the ark was
   such that it began with being thirty cubits broad and gradually
   narrowed to one. Similarly the Church, consisting of many grades, ends
   in deacons, presbyters, and bishops. The ark was in peril in the flood,
   the Church is in peril in the world. When Noah left the ark he planted
   a vineyard, drank thereof, and was drunken. Christ also, born in the
   flesh, planted the Church and suffered. The elder son made sport of his
   father's nakedness, the younger covered it: and the Jews mocked God
   crucified, the Gentiles honoured Him. The daylight would fail me if I
   were to explain all the mysteries of the ark and compare them with the
   Church. Who are the eagles amongst us? Who the doves and lions, who the
   stags, who the worms and serpents? So far as our subject requires I
   will briefly show you. It is not the sheep only who abide in the
   Church, nor do clean birds only fly to and fro there; but amid the
   grain other seed is sown, [4138] "amidst the neat corn-fields burrs and
   caltrops and barren oats lord it in the land." What is the husbandman
   to do? Root up the darnel? In that case the whole harvest is destroyed
   along with it. Every day the farmer diligently drives the birds away
   with strange noises, or frightens them with scarecrows: here he cracks
   a whip, there he spreads out some other object to terrify them.
   Nevertheless he suffers from the raids of nimble roes or the wantonness
   of the wild asses; here the mice convey the corn to their garners
   underground, there the ants crowd thickly in and ravage the corn-field.
   Thus the case stands. No one who has land is free from care. [4139]
   While the householder slept the enemy sowed tares among the wheat, and
   when the servants proposed to go and root them up the master forbade
   them, reserving for himself the separation of the chaff and the grain.
   [4140] There are vessels of wrath and of mercy which the Apostle speaks
   of in the house of God. The day then will come when the storehouses of
   the Church shall be opened and the Lord will bring forth the vessels of
   wrath; and, as they depart, the saints will say, [4141] "They went out
   from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they
   would no doubt have continued with us." No one can take to himself the
   prerogative of Christ, no one before the day of judgment can pass
   judgment upon men. If the Church is already cleansed, what shall we
   reserve for the Lord? [4142] "There is a way which seemeth right unto a
   man, but the end thereof are the ways of death." When our judgment is
   so prone to error, upon whose opinion can we rely?

   23. Cyprian of blessed memory tried to avoid broken cisterns and not to
   drink of strange waters: and therefore, rejecting heretical baptism, he
   summoned his [4143] African synod in opposition to Stephen, [4144] who
   was the blessed Peter's twenty-second successor in the see of Rome.
   They met to discuss this matter; but the attempt failed. At last those
   very bishops who had together with him determined that heretics must be
   re-baptized, reverted to the old custom and published a fresh decree.
   Do you ask what course we must pursue? What we do our forefathers
   handed down to us as their forefathers to them. But why speak of later
   times? When the blood of Christ was but lately shed and the apostles
   were still in Judæa, the Lord's body was asserted to be a phantom; the
   Galatians had been led away to the observance of the law, and the
   Apostle was a second time in travail with them; the Corinthians did not
   believe the resurrection of the flesh, and he endeavoured by many
   arguments to bring them back to the right path. Then came [4145] Simon
   Magus and his disciple Menander. They asserted themselves to be [4146]
   powers of God. Then [4147] Basilides invented the most high god Abraxas
   and the three hundred and sixty-five manifestations of him. Then [4148]
   Nicolas, one of the seven Deacons, and one whose lechery knew no rest
   by night or day, indulged in his filthy dreams. I say nothing of the
   Jewish heretics who before the coming of Christ destroyed the law
   delivered to them: of [4149] Dositheus, the leader of the Samaritans
   who rejected the prophets: of the Sadducees who sprang from his root
   and denied even the resurrection of the flesh: of the Pharisees who
   separated themselves from the Jews [4150] on account of certain
   superfluous observances, and took their name from the fact of their
   dissent: of the Herodians who accepted Herod as the Christ. I come to
   those heretics who have mangled the Gospels, [4151] Saturninus, and the
   [4152] Ophites, [4153] the Cainites and [4154] Sethites, and [4155]
   Carpocrates, and [4156] Cerinthus, and his successor [4157] Ebion, and
   the other pests, the most of which broke out while the apostle John was
   still alive, and yet we do not read that any of these men were
   re-baptized.

   24. As we have made mention of that distinguished saint, let us show
   also from his Apocalypse that repentance unaccompanied by baptism ought
   to be allowed valid in the case of heretics. It is imputed (Rev. ii. 4)
   to the angel of Ephesus that he has forsaken his first love. In the
   angel of the Church of Pergamum the eating of idol-sacrifices is
   censured (Rev. ii. 14), and the doctrine of the Nicolaitans (ib. 15).
   Likewise the angel of Thyatira is rebuked (ib. 20) on account of
   Jezebel the prophetess, and the idol meats, and fornication. And yet
   the Lord encourages all these to repent, and adds a threat, moreover,
   of future punishment if they do not turn. Now he would not urge them to
   repent unless he intended to grant pardon to the penitents. Is there
   any indication of his having said, Let them be re-baptized who have
   been baptized in the faith of the Nicolaitans? or let hands be laid
   upon those of the people of Pergamum who at that time believed, having
   held the doctrine of Balaam? Nay, rather, "Repent therefore," [4158] he
   says, "or else I come to thee quickly, and I will make war against them
   with the sword of my mouth."

   25. If, however, those men who were ordained by Hilary, and who have
   lately become sheep without a shepherd, are disposed to allege
   Scripture in support of what the blessed Cyprian [4159] left in his
   letters advocating the re-baptization of heretics, I beg them to
   remember that he did not anathematize those who refused to follow him.
   At all events, he remained in communion with such as opposed his views.
   He was content with exhorting them, on account of [4160] Novatus and
   the numerous other heretics then springing up, to receive no one who
   did not condemn his previous error. In fact, he thus concludes the
   discussion of the subject with Stephen, the Roman Pontiff: "These
   things, dearest brother, I have brought to your knowledge on account of
   our mutual respect and love unfeigned, believing, as I do, that from
   the sincerity of your piety and your faith you will approve such things
   as are alike consonant with piety and true in themselves. But I know
   that some persons are unwilling to abandon views which they have once
   entertained, and are averse to a change of purpose; they would rather,
   without breaking the bond of peace and concord between colleagues,
   adhere to their own plans, when once they have been adopted. This is a
   matter in which we do not force anyone, or lay down a law for anyone;
   let each follow his own free choice in the administration of the
   Church: let each be ruler in his own sphere since he must give account
   of his action to the Lord." In the letter also to Jubaianus on the
   re-baptization of heretics, towards the end, he says this: "I have
   written these few remarks, my dearest brother, to the best of my poor
   ability, without dictating to anyone, or prejudicing the case of
   anyone: I would not hinder a single bishop from doing what he thinks
   right with the full exercise of his own judgment. So far as is
   possible, we avoid disputes with colleagues and fellow-bishops about
   the heretics, and maintain with them a divine harmony and the Lord's
   peace, particularly since the Apostle says: [4161] But if any man seem
   to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of
   God.' With patience and gentleness we preserve charity at heart, the
   honour of our order, the bond of faith, the harmony of the episcopate."

   26. There is another argument which I shall adduce, and against that
   not even Hilary, [4162] the modern Deucalion, will venture to mutter a
   syllable. If heretics are not baptized and must be re-baptized because
   they were not in the Church, Hilary himself also is not a Christian.
   For he was baptized in that Church which always allowed heretical
   baptism. Before the Synod of Ariminum was held, before Lucifer went
   into exile, Hilary when a deacon of the Roman Church welcomed those who
   came over from the heretics on account of the baptism which they had
   previously received. It can hardly be that Arians are the only
   heretics, and that we are to accept all but those whom they have
   baptized. You were a deacon, Hilary (the Church may say), and received
   those whom the Manichæans had baptized. You were a deacon, and
   acknowledged Ebion's baptism. All at once after Arius arose you began
   to be quite out of conceit with yourself. You and your household
   separated from us, and opened a new laver of your own. If some angel or
   apostle has re-baptized you, I will not disparage your procedure. But
   since you who raise your sword against me are the son of my womb, and
   nourished on the milk of my breasts, return to me what I gave you, and
   be, if you can, a Christian in some other way. Suppose I am a harlot,
   still I am your mother. You say, I do not keep the marriage bed
   undefiled: still what I am now I was when you were conceived. If I
   commit adultery with Arius, I did the same before with Praxias, with
   Ebion, with Cerinthus, and Novatus. You think much of them and welcome
   them, adulterers as they are, to your mother's home. I don't know why
   one adulterer more than others should offend you.

   27. But if anyone thinks it open to question whether heretics were
   always welcomed by our ancestors, let him read the letters of the
   blessed Cyprian in which he applies the lash to Stephen, bishop of
   Rome, and his errors which had grown inveterate by usage. [4163] Let
   him also read the pamphlets of Hilary on the re-baptization of heretics
   which he published against us, and he will there find Hilary himself
   confessing that [4164] Julius, Marcus, Sylvester, and the other bishops
   of old alike welcomed all heretics to repentance; and, further, to shew
   that he could not justly claim possession of the true custom; the
   Council of Nicæa also, to which we referred not long ago, welcomed all
   heretics with the exception of [4165] the disciples of Paul of
   Samosata. And, what is more, it allows a Novatian bishop on conversion
   to have the rank of presbyter, [4166] a decision which condemns both
   Lucifer and Hilary, since the same person who is ordained is also
   baptized.

   28. I might spend the day in speaking to the same effect, and dry up
   all the streams of argument with the single Sun of the Church. But as
   we have already had a long discussion and the protracted controversy
   has wearied out the attention of our audience, I will tell you my
   opinion briefly and without reserve. We ought to remain in that Church
   which was founded by the Apostles and continues to this day. If ever
   you hear of any that are called Christians taking their name not from
   the Lord Jesus Christ, but from some other, for instance, Marcionites,
   Valentinians, Men of the mountain or the plain, [4167] you may be sure
   that you have there not the Church of Christ, but the synagogue of
   Antichrist. For the fact that they took their rise after the foundation
   of the Church is proof that they are those whose coming the Apostle
   foretold. And let them not flatter themselves if they think they have
   Scripture authority for their assertions, since the devil himself
   quoted Scripture, and the essence of the Scriptures is not the letter,
   but the meaning. Otherwise, if we follow the letter, we too can concoct
   a new dogma and assert that such persons as wear shoes and have two
   coats must not be received into the Church.

   L. You must not suppose that victory rests with you only. We are both
   conquerors, and each of us carries off the palm,--you are victorious
   over me, and I over my error. May I always when I argue be so fortunate
   as to exchange wrong opinions for better ones. I must, however, make a
   confession, because I best know the character of my party, and own that
   they are more easily conquered than convinced.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4049] The Sardinian cloak of skins is contrasted by Cicero (pro
   Scauro) with the Royal purple:--Quem purpura regalis non commovit, eum
   Sardorum mastruca mutavit. Jerome's meaning is that Christ came not to
   win the lowest place on earth, but the highest. The fact that Lucifer
   was Bishop of Cagliari in Sardinia gives point to the saying.

   [4050] That is, of Jupiter, whose temple was in the Capitol.

   [4051] Ps. lvii. 6.

   [4052] Sacerdotium.

   [4053] Apoc. i. 6.

   [4054] 1 Pet. ii. 9.

   [4055] That is diocese. The word diocese was in early times the larger
   expression, and contained many provinces. See Canon II of
   Constantinople, Bright's edition, and note.

   [4056] Matt. v. 13.

   [4057] Lev. ix. 7.

   [4058] Tit. i. 7.

   [4059] 1 Cor. xi. 28.

   [4060] Matt. vii. 6.

   [4061] Numb. xvi. 26.

   [4062] Hos. ix. 4.

   [4063] Matt. vii. 22.

   [4064] Matt. v. 15.

   [4065] Matt. vi. 23-24.

   [4066] Matt. vi. 23-24.

   [4067] 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15.

   [4068] Levit. xxi. 17.

   [4069] Quoted apparently from memory as giving the general sense of
   passages in Lev. xxi, xxii.

   [4070] Quoted apparently from memory as giving the general sense of
   passages in Lev. xxi, xxii.

   [4071] Gen. i. 2.

   [4072] John v. 2 sq.

   [4073] xix. 2.

   [4074] Is. xi. 3; Matt. iii. 3.

   [4075] John i. 29.

   [4076] Luke i. 43.

   [4077] Acts ix. 17.

   [4078] Matt. xi. 11.

   [4079] Matt. xi. 10.

   [4080] We venture to read decebat' instead of dicebat.' Otherwise, we
   may render Thus (the Scripture) said that,' etc.

   [4081] Mark i. 4.

   [4082] Mark i. 5.

   [4083] John iii. 31.

   [4084] Matt. iii. 11.

   [4085] John iii. 30.

   [4086] Acts xix. 1, sqq.

   [4087] Triple immersion, that is, thrice dipping the head while
   standing in the water, was the all but universal rule of the Church in
   early times. There is proof of its existence in Africa, Palestine,
   Egypt, at Antioch and Constantinople, in Cappadocia and Rome. See
   Basil, On the H. Sp. § 66, and Apostolical Canons. Gregory the Great
   ruled that either form was allowable, the one symbolizing the Unity of
   the Godhead, the other the Trinity of Persons.

   [4088] This ceremony together with the kiss of peace and white robes
   probably dated from very early times. In the fourth century some new
   ceremonies were introduced, such as the use of lights and salt, the
   unction with oil before baptism in addition to that with chrism which
   continued to be administered after baptism.

   [4089] At Holy Communion the first prayer of the faithful was said by
   all kneeling. During the rest of the liturgy all stood. At other times
   of service the rule was for all to kneel in prayer except on Sundays
   and between Easter and Whitsuntide.

   [4090] The Arians said He was the creature (made out of nothing)
   through whom the Father gave being to all other creatures.

   [4091] The Macedonians, who became nearly co-extensive with the
   Semi-Arians about 360, held that the Spirit not being very' God must be
   a creature and therefore a Servant of God.

   [4092] Sacerdotium--often used by Jerome in a special sense for the
   Episcopate. He says of Pammachius and of himself (Letter xlv., 3) that
   many people thought them digni sacerdotio, meaning the Bishopric of
   Rome.

   [4093] Acts viii. 26 sq.

   [4094] "The philosophical relations of Arianism have been differently
   stated. Baur, Newman (The Arians, p. 17), and others, bring it into
   connection with Aristotle, and Athanasianism with Plato; Petavius,
   Ritter, and Voigt, on the contrary, derive the Arian idea of God from
   Platonism and Neo-Platonism. The empirical, rational, logical tendency
   of Arianism is certainly more Aristotelian than Platonic, and so far
   Baur and Newman are right; but all depends on making either revelation
   and faith, or philosophy and reason, the starting point and ruling
   power of theology." Doctor Schaff in Dict. of Chris. Biog.

   [4095] Baptism was at this time, as a rule, administered by the bishop
   alone.

   [4096] This was, approximately, the Patripassian form of the heresy,
   according to which the person of the Father who is one with the Son,
   was incarnate in Christ, and the Father might then be said to have died
   upon the cross. The personality of the Holy Ghost appears to have been
   denied. With varying shades of opinion and modes of expression the
   doctrine was expounded by Praxeas (circ. a.d. 200), Noetius (a.d. 220),
   Sabellius (a.d. 225), Beryllus and Paul of Samosata (circ. a.d. 250).

   [4097] That is the followers of Lucifer, whose see was in Sardinia.

   [4098] Ps. xii. 1. The Luciferians believed that few or none outside
   their own sect could be saved.

   [4099] Ps. xxx. 9.

   [4100] Mark iii. 27.

   [4101] Ps. ii. 8.

   [4102] Ps. xviii. 15.

   [4103] Lit. In the sun hath he placed his tabernacle, and there is none
   who can hide himself from the heat thereof. Ps. xix. 6.

   [4104] Ps. ix. 6. Sept. Vulg. Syr.

   [4105] The allusion is doubtful. It probably refers to some province of
   Spain (perhaps that of the Ibera or Ebro), in which the views of
   Lucifer prevailed and which his followers considered almost the sole
   land of the faithful. The expression, however, is used in a more
   general sense by Jerome, Letter VI.

   [4106] Luke xviii. 8.

   [4107] Matt. ix. 22.

   [4108] Matt. viii. 10.

   [4109] Matt. viii. 26.

   [4110] Matt. xvii. 20.

   [4111] Matt. ix. 21.

   [4112] Matt. ix. 29.

   [4113] For an account of the "Dated Creed" here referred to, and of the
   Councils of Seleucia and Ariminum, a.d. 359, see Bright's History of
   the Church, a.d. 313-451, fourth edition, pp. 93-100.

   [4114] Principium, the equivalent of the Greek 'Arche, which means
   beginning, or principle, or power.

   [4115] These two propositions constituted the essence of the teaching
   of Arius.

   [4116] Usia (ousia) is defined by Cyril of Alexandria as that which has
   existence in itself, independent of everything else to constitute it. A
   discussion of both it and its companion term hypostasis may be found in
   Newman's Arians, Appendix p. 432. Around ousia, or some compound of the
   word, the great Arian controversy always raged. In asserting that the
   son was homoousios with the Father, i.e., consubstantial or
   co-essential, the Church affirmed the Godhead of the Son. But the
   formula experienced varying fortunes. It was disowned as savouring of
   heterodoxy by the Council of Antioch (264-269) which was held to decide
   upon the views of Paulus: was imposed at Nicæa (325): considered
   inexpedient by the great body of the episcopate in the next generation:
   was most cautiously put forward by Athanasius himself (see Stanley's
   Hist. of Eastern Church, 1883, p. 240): does not occur in the
   catecheses of S. Cyril of Jerusalem (347): was momentarily abandoned by
   400 bishops at Ariminum who were "tricked and worried" into the act.
   "They had not," says Newman, "yet got it deeply fixed in their minds as
   a sort of first principle, that to abandon the formula was to betray
   the faith."

   [4117] The distinguishing principle of the doctrine of Acacius was
   adherence to Scriptural phraseology. See Bright's Hist., p. 69.

   [4118] The teaching of Ætius and Eunomius, the Anomoeans, who were the
   extremists of the Arians. See Robertson's Hist. of Chris. Ch., fourth
   edition, pp. 236-237, etc. The other tenets anathematized are Arian or
   Semi-Arian.

   [4119] Bishop of Singedunum (Belgrade). "He and Valens, bishop of Mursa
   (in Pannonia) appear at every Synod and Council from 330 till about
   370, as leaders of the Arian party, both in the East and West...They
   are described by Athanasius as the disciples of Arius." Dict. of Chris.
   Biog.

   [4120] Constantius.

   [4121] Julian.

   [4122] In August 362, "All Egypt seemed to assemble in the city
   (Alexandria), which blazed with lights and rang with acclamations; the
   air was fragrant with incense burnt in token of joy; men formed a choir
   to precede the Archbishop; to hear his voice, to catch a glimpse of his
   face, even to see his shadow, was deemed happiness." Bright, p. 115.

   [4123] Bishop of Poictiers (a.d. 350). Died a.d. 368.

   [4124] Bishop of Vercellae in N. Italy. Died about a.d. 370. Both he
   and Hilary had been sent into exile by Constantius for their opposition
   to Arianism.

   [4125] That is, the creed of Ariminum.

   [4126] Said to have been the "most prominent and most distinguished man
   of the entire movement." Athanasius suggested that he was the teacher
   rather than the disciple of Arius. He died a.d. 342.

   [4127] Regarded as one of the chief opponents of Athanasius. He and
   others it is said saved themselves from exile by secretly substituting
   omoiousios for homoousios in the sentence of the Council.

   [4128] Born probably, about a.d. 260. He was made bishop of Cæsarea
   about 313 and lived to be eighty. At the time of the Council he was the
   most learned man and most famous living writer. He had great influence
   with Constantine, and was among the most moderate Arians.

   [4129] Eudoxius was deposed from the bishopric of Antioch by the
   Council of Seleucia, a.d. 359; but the immediate predecessor of Euzoius
   was Meletius, deposed a.d. 361. Baronius describes him as the worst of
   all the Arians. Euzoius had been the companion and intimate friend of
   Arius from an early age. Athanasius (Hist. Arian. p. 858) calls him the
   "Canaanite."

   [4130] Saints Athanasius, Hilary of Poictiers, and Eusebius of
   Vercellae.

   [4131] a.d. 328, when Athanasius was consecrated bishop.

   [4132] See introduction.

   [4133] This Hilary was a deacon of Rome, sent by Liberius the bishop
   with Lucifer and Pancratius to the Emperor Constantius. He joined the
   Luciferians, and wrote in their interest on the re-baptism of heretics.
   He appears, however, to have been reconciled before his death.

   [4134] 1 Pet. iii. 20.

   [4135] 2 Tim. ii. 20.

   [4136] Ecc. xi. 2.

   [4137] Vulg. for l ssygyt Psa. vi. xii. and 1 Chron. xv. 21. The
   meaning is probably "in a lower octave," or, "in the bass." According
   to others, an air, or key in which the psalm was to be sung, or a
   musical instrument with eight strings.

   [4138] Virg, Georg. i. 154.

   [4139] S. Matt. xiii. 24 sq.

   [4140] Rom. ix. 22, 23; 2 Tim. ii. 20, 21.

   [4141] 1 John ii. 19.

   [4142] Prov. xiv. 12.

   [4143] Stephen was willing to admit all heretical baptism, even that by
   Marcionites and Ophites; Cyprian would admit none. The Council was held
   at Carthage a.d. 255, and was followed by two in the next year.

   [4144] Bishop of Rome from May 12, a.d. 254, to Aug. 2, a.d. 257. See
   note on ch. 25.

   [4145] The words of 1 John iv. 3 would appear to support Jerome's
   remark.

   [4146] Acts viii. 10. In the Clementine Homilies and Recognitions Simon
   is the constant opponent of St. Peter.

   [4147] Commonly regarded as the chief among the Egyptian Gnostics. The
   Basilidian system is described by Irenaeus (101f).

   [4148] Acts vi. 5, Rev. ii. 6, 15. As to how far Jerome's estimate of
   the character of Nicolas is correct, the article Nicolas in Smith's
   Dict. of Bible may be consulted.

   [4149] Jerome here reproduces almost exactly the remark of
   Pseudo-Tertullian. The Dositheans were probably a Jewish or Samaritan
   ascetic sect, something akin to the Essenes.

   [4150] The name Pharisee implies separation, but in the sense of
   dedication to God.

   [4151] Of Antioch. One of the earliest of the Gnostics (second
   century).

   [4152] The Ophites, whose name is derived from ophis, a serpent, were a
   sect which lasted from the second century to the sixth. Some of them
   believed that the serpent of Gen. iii. was either the Divine Wisdom, or
   the Christ himself, come to enlighten mankind. Their errors may in
   great measure, like those of the Cainites, be traced to the belief,
   common to all systems of Gnosticism, that the Creator of the world, who
   was the God of the Jews, was not the same as the Supreme Being, but was
   in antagonism to Him. They supposed that the Scriptures were written in
   the interest of the Demiurge or Creator, and that a false colouring
   being given to the story, the real worthies were those who are
   reprobated in the sacred writings.

   [4153] The Cainites regarded as saints, Cain, Korah, Dathan, the
   Sodomites, and even the traitor Judas.

   [4154] The Sethites are said to have looked upon Seth as the same
   person as Christ.

   [4155] Carpocrates, another Gnostic, held that our Lord was the son of
   Joseph and Mary, and was distinguished from other men by nothing except
   moral superiority. He also taught the indifference of actions in
   themselves, and maintained that they take their quality from opinion or
   from legislation; he advocated community of goods and of wives, basing
   his views on the doctrine of natural rights. See Mosheim, Cent. ii.

   [4156] Cerinthus was a native of Judæa, and after having studied at
   Alexandria established himself as a teacher in his own country. He
   afterwards removed to Ephesus, and there became prominent. He held that
   Jesus and the Christ were not the same person; Jesus was, he said, a
   real man, the son of Joseph and Mary; the Christ was an emanation which
   descended upon Jesus at his baptism to reveal the Most High, but which
   forsook him before the Passion. S. John in his Gospel and Epistles
   combats this error. See Westcott's Introduction to 1 John, p. xxxiv.
   (second ed.) etc. Cerinthus is said to have been the heretic with whom
   S. John refused to be under the same roof at the bath. To him as author
   is also referred the doctrine of the Millennium.

   [4157] The Ebionites were mere humanitarians. Whether Ebion ever
   existed, or whether the sect took its name from the beggarliness of
   their doctrine, or their vow of poverty, or the poorness of spirit
   which they professed, is disputed.

   [4158] Rev. ii. 16.

   [4159] Cyprian's opinion as stated in his reply to the Numidian and
   Mauritanian bishops (Ep. 71) was that converts must be baptized, unless
   they had received the regular baptism of the Church before falling into
   heresy or schism, in which case imposition of hands would suffice. The
   question was afterwards decided against Cyprian's views by the Council
   of Arles (a.d. 314), which ordered that if the baptism had been
   administered in the name of the Trinity, converts should be admitted to
   the Church by imposition of hands.

   [4160] For Novatus and an account of the dispute between Cyprian and
   Stephen, see Robertson's "Hist. of Christian Church," fourth ed., vol.
   i. pp. 120-127.

   [4161] 1 Cor. xi. 16.

   [4162] As Deucalion was left alone after the flood, so, Jerome implies,
   Hilary imagined himself the sole survivor after the flood of Arianism.

   [4163] The advocates on each side could plead immemorial local usage.
   If imposition of hands was the rule at Rome, synods held at Iconium and
   at Synnada had established the rule of re-baptism nearly throughout
   Asia Minor. In Africa the same practice had been sanctioned early in
   the third century, but it seems to have fallen into disuse long before
   Cyprian's time.

   [4164] Bishops of Rome--Julius 337-352; Mark Jan. 18-Oct. 7, 336;
   Sylvester 314-335.

   [4165] Canon 19.

   [4166] Canon 8. The bishop might give him the nominal honour of a
   bishop.

   [4167] By the "men of the mountain or the plain," Jerome appears to
   contemptuously designate the Circumcellions who were an extreme section
   of the Donatists. They roamed about the country in bands of both sexes,
   and struck terror into the peaceable inhabitants. They were guilty of
   the grossest excesses, and no Catholic was safe except in the towns.
   Robertson's "Hist. of the Church," vol. i. fourth ed. pp. 200, 419, and
   the original authorities there referred to.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Perpetual Virginity of Blessed Mary.

   ------------------------

   Against Helvidius.

   This tract appeared about a.d. 383. The question which gave occasion to
   it was whether the Mother of our Lord remained a Virgin after His
   birth. Helvidius maintained that the mention in the Gospels of the
   "sisters" and "brethren" of our Lord was proof that the Blessed Virgin
   had subsequent issue, and he supported his opinion by the writings of
   Tertullian and Victorinus. The outcome of his views was that virginity
   was ranked below matrimony. Jerome vigorously takes the other side, and
   tries to prove that the "sisters" and "brethren" spoken of, were either
   children of Joseph by a former marriage, or first cousins, children of
   the sister of the Virgin. A detailed account of the controversy will be
   found in Farrar's "Early Days of Christianity," pp. 124 sq. When Jerome
   wrote this treatise both he and Helvidius were at Rome, and Damasus was
   Pope. The only contemporary notice preserved of Helvidius is that by
   Jerome in the following pages.

   Jerome maintains against Helvidius three propositions:--

   1st. That Joseph was only putatively, not really, the husband of Mary.

   2d. That the "brethren" of the Lord were his cousins, not his own
   brethren.

   3d. That virginity is better than the married state.

   1. The first of these occupies ch. 3-8. It turns upon the record in
   Matt. i. 18-25, and especially on the words, "Before they came
   together" (c. 4), "knew her not till, &c." (5-8).

   2. The second (c. 9-17) turns upon the words "first-born son" (9, 10),
   which, Jerome argues, are applicable not only to the eldest of several,
   but also to an only son: and the mention of brothers and sisters, whom
   Jerome asserts to have been children of Mary the wife of Cleophas or
   Clopas (11-16); he appeals to many Church writers in support of this
   view (17).

   3. In support of his preference of virginity to marriage, Jerome argues
   that not only Mary but Joseph also remained in the virgin state (19);
   that, though marriage may sometimes be a holy estate, it presents great
   hindrances to prayer (20), and the teaching of Scripture is that the
   states of virginity and continency are more accordant with God's will
   than that of marriage (21, 22).

   1. I was requested by certain of the brethren not long ago to reply to
   a pamphlet written by one Helvidius. I have deferred doing so, not
   because it is a difficult matter to maintain the truth and refute an
   ignorant boor who has scarce known the first glimmer of learning, but
   because I was afraid my reply might make him appear worth defeating.
   There was the further consideration that a turbulent fellow, the only
   individual in the world who thinks himself both priest and layman, one
   who, [4168] as has been said, thinks that eloquence consists in
   loquacity and considers speaking ill of anyone to be the witness of a
   good conscience, would begin to blaspheme worse than ever if
   opportunity of discussion were afforded him. He would stand as it were
   on a pedestal, and would publish his views far and wide. There was
   reason also to fear that when truth failed him he would assail his
   opponents with the weapon of abuse. But all these motives for silence,
   though just, have more justly ceased to influence me, because of the
   scandal caused to the brethren who were disgusted at his ravings. The
   axe of the Gospel must therefore be now laid to the root of the barren
   tree, and both it and its fruitless foliage cast into the fire, so that
   Helvidius who has never learnt to speak, may at length learn to hold
   his tongue.

   2. I must call upon the Holy Spirit to express His meaning by my mouth
   and defend the virginity of the Blessed Mary. I must call upon the Lord
   Jesus to guard the sacred lodging of the womb in which He abode for ten
   months from all suspicion of sexual intercourse. And I must also
   entreat God the Father to show that the mother of His Son, who was a
   mother before she was a bride, continued a Virgin after her son was
   born. We have no desire to career over the fields of eloquence, we do
   not resort to the snares of the logicians or the thickets of Aristotle.
   We shall adduce the actual words of Scripture. Let him be refuted by
   the same proofs which he employed against us, so that he may see that
   it was possible for him to read what is written, and yet to be unable
   to discern the established conclusion of a sound faith.

   3. His first statement was: "Matthew says, [4169] Now the birth of
   Jesus Christ was on this wise: When his mother Mary had been betrothed
   to Joseph, before they came together she was found with child of the
   Holy Ghost. And Joseph her husband, being a righteous man, and not
   willing to make her a public example, was minded to put her away
   privately. But when he thought on these things, behold, an angel of the
   Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David,
   fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived
   in her is of the Holy Ghost." Notice, he says, that the word used is
   betrothed, not intrusted as you say, and of course the only reason why
   she was betrothed was that she might one day be married. And the
   Evangelist would not have said before they came together if they were
   not to come together, for no one would use the phrase before he dined
   of a man who was not going to dine. Then, again, the angel calls her
   wife and speaks of her as united to Joseph. We are next invited to
   listen to the declaration of Scripture: [4170] "And Joseph arose from
   his sleep, and did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and took
   unto him his wife; and knew her not till she had brought forth her
   son."

   4. Let us take the points one by one, and follow the tracks of this
   impiety that we may show that he has contradicted himself. He admits
   that she was betrothed, and in the next breath will have her to be a
   man's wife whom he has admitted to be his betrothed. Again, he calls
   her wife, and then says the only reason why she was betrothed was that
   she might one day be married. And, for fear we might not think that
   enough, "the word used," he says, "is betrothed and not intrusted, that
   is to say, not yet a wife, not yet united by the bond of wedlock." But
   when he continues, "the Evangelist would never have applied the words,
   before they came together to persons who were not to come together, any
   more than one says, before he dined, when the man is not going to
   dine," I know not whether to grieve or laugh. Shall I convict him of
   ignorance, or accuse him of rashness? Just as if, supposing a person to
   say, "Before dining in harbour I sailed to Africa," his words could not
   hold good unless he were compelled some day to dine in harbour. If I
   choose to say, "the apostle Paul before he went to Spain was put in
   fetters at Rome," or (as I certainly might) "Helvidius, before he
   repented, was cut off by death," must Paul on being released at once go
   to Spain, or must Helvidius repent after death, although the Scripture
   says [4171] "In sheol who shall give thee thanks?" Must we not rather
   understand that the preposition before, although it frequently denotes
   order in time, yet sometimes refers only to order in thought? So that
   there is no necessity, if sufficient cause intervened to prevent it,
   for our thoughts to be realized. When, then, the Evangelist says before
   they came together, he indicates the time immediately preceding
   marriage, and shows that matters were so far advanced that she who had
   been betrothed was on the point of becoming a wife. As though he said,
   before they kissed and embraced, before the consummation of marriage,
   she was found to be with child. And she was found to be so by none
   other than Joseph, who watched the swelling womb of his betrothed with
   the anxious glances, and, at this time, almost the privilege, of a
   husband. Yet it does not follow, as the previous examples showed, that
   he had intercourse with Mary after her delivery, when his desires had
   been quenched by the fact that she had already conceived. And although
   we find it said to Joseph in a dream, "Fear not to take Mary thy wife";
   and again, "Joseph arose from his sleep, and did as the angel of the
   Lord commanded him, and took unto him his wife," no one ought to be
   disturbed by this, as though, inasmuch as she is called wife, she
   ceases to be betrothed, for we know it is usual in Scripture to give
   the title to those who are betrothed. The following evidence from
   Deuteronomy establishes the point. [4172] "If the man," says the
   writer, "find the damsel that is betrothed in the field, and the man
   force her, and lie with her, he shall surely die, because he hath
   humbled his neighbour's wife." And in another place, [4173] "If there
   be a damsel that is a virgin betrothed unto an husband, and a man find
   her in the city, and lie with her; then ye shall bring them both out
   unto the gate of that city, and ye shall stone them with stones that
   they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the city; and the
   man, because he hath humbled his neighbour's wife: so thou shalt put
   away the evil from the midst of thee." Elsewhere also, [4174] "And what
   man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her? let
   him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and
   another man take her." But if anyone feels a doubt as to why the Virgin
   conceived after she was betrothed rather than when she had no one
   betrothed to her, or, to use the Scripture phrase, no husband, let me
   explain that there were three reasons. First, that by the genealogy of
   Joseph, whose kinswoman Mary was, Mary's origin might also be shown.
   Secondly, that she might not in accordance with the law of Moses be
   stoned as an adulteress. Thirdly, that in her flight to Egypt she might
   have some solace, though it was that of a guardian rather than a
   husband. For who at that time would have believed the Virgin's word
   that she had conceived of the Holy Ghost, and that the angel Gabriel
   had come and announced the purpose of God? and would not all have given
   their opinion against her as an adulteress, like Susanna? for at the
   present day, now that the whole world has embraced the faith, the Jews
   argue that when Isaiah says, [4175] "Behold, a virgin shall conceive
   and bear a son," the Hebrew word denotes a young woman, not a virgin,
   that is to say, the word is Almah, not Bethulah, a position which,
   farther on, we shall dispute more in detail. Lastly, excepting Joseph,
   and Elizabeth, and Mary herself, and some few others who, we may
   suppose, heard the truth from them, all considered Jesus to be the son
   of Joseph. And so far was this the case that even the Evangelists,
   expressing the prevailing opinion, which is the correct rule for a
   historian, call him the father of the Saviour, as, for instance, [4176]
   "And he (that is, Simeon) came in the Spirit into the temple: and when
   the parents brought in the child Jesus, that they might do concerning
   him after the custom of the law;" and elsewhere, [4177] "And his
   parents went every year to Jerusalem at the feast of the passover." And
   afterwards, [4178] "And when they had fulfilled the days, as they were
   returning, the boy Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and his parents
   knew not of it." Observe also what Mary herself, who had replied to
   Gabriel with the words, [4179] "How shall this be, seeing I know not a
   man?" says concerning Joseph, [4180] "Son, why hast thou thus dealt
   with us? behold, thy father and I sought thee sorrowing." We have not
   here, as many maintain, the utterance of Jews or of mockers. The
   Evangelists call Joseph father: Mary confesses he was father. Not (as I
   said before) that Joseph was really the father of the Saviour: but
   that, to preserve the reputation of Mary, he was regarded by all as his
   father, although, before he heard the admonition of the angel, [4181]
   "Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife:
   for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost," he had
   thoughts of putting her away privily; which shows that he well knew
   that the child conceived was not his. But we have said enough, more
   with the aim of imparting instruction than of answering an opponent, to
   show why Joseph is called the father of our Lord, and why Mary is
   called Joseph's wife. This also at once answers the question why
   certain persons are called his brethren.

   5. This, however, is a point which will find its proper place further
   on. We must now hasten to other matters. The passage for discussion now
   is, "And Joseph arose from his sleep, and did as the angel of the Lord
   commanded him, and took unto him his wife and knew her not till she had
   brought forth a son, and he called his name Jesus." Here, first of all,
   it is quite needless for our opponent to show so elaborately that the
   word know has reference to coition, rather than to intellectual
   apprehension: as though anyone denied it, or any person in his senses
   could ever imagine the folly which Helvidius takes pains to refute.
   Then he would teach us that the adverb till implies a fixed and
   definite time, and when that is fulfilled, he says the event takes
   place which previously did not take place, as in the case before us,
   "and knew her not till she had brought forth a son." It is clear, says
   he, that she was known after she brought forth, and that that knowledge
   was only delayed by her engendering a son. To defend his position he
   piles up text upon text, waves his sword like a blind-folded gladiator,
   rattles his noisy tongue, and ends with wounding no one but himself.

   6. Our reply is briefly this,--the words knew and till in the language
   of Holy Scripture are capable of a double meaning. As to the former, he
   himself gave us a dissertation to show that it must be referred to
   sexual intercourse, and no one doubts that it is often used of the
   knowledge of the understanding, as, for instance, "the boy Jesus
   tarried behind in Jerusalem, and his parents knew it not." Now we have
   to prove that just as in the one case he has followed the usage of
   Scripture, so with regard to the word till he is utterly refuted by the
   authority of the same Scripture, which often denotes by its use a fixed
   time (he himself told us so), frequently time without limitation, as
   when God by the mouth of the prophet says to certain persons, [4182]
   "Even to old age I am he." Will He cease to be God when they have grown
   old? And the Saviour in the Gospel tells the Apostles, [4183] "Lo, I am
   with you alway, even unto the end of the world." Will the Lord then
   after the end of the world has come forsake His disciples, and at the
   very time when seated on twelve thrones they are to judge the twelve
   tribes of Israel will they be bereft of the company of their Lord?
   Again Paul the Apostle writing to the Corinthians [4184] says, "Christ
   the first-fruits, afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming. Then
   cometh the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God,
   even the Father, when he shall have put down all rule, and all
   authority and power. For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies
   under his feet." Granted that the passage relates to our Lord's human
   nature, we do not deny that the words are spoken of Him who endured the
   cross and is commanded to sit afterwards on the right hand. What does
   he mean then by saying, "for he must reign, till he hath put all
   enemies under his feet"? Is the Lord to reign only until His enemies
   begin to be under His feet, and once they are under His feet will He
   cease to reign? Of course His reign will then commence in its fulness
   when His enemies begin to be under His feet. David also in the fourth
   Song of Ascents [4185] speaks thus, "Behold, as the eyes of servants
   look unto the hand of their master, as the eyes of a maiden unto the
   hand of her mistress, so our eyes look unto the Lord our God, until he
   have mercy upon us." Will the prophet, then, look unto the Lord until
   he obtain mercy, and when mercy is obtained will he turn his eyes down
   to the ground? although elsewhere he says, [4186] "Mine eyes fail for
   thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness." I could
   accumulate countless instances of this usage, and cover the verbosity
   of our assailant with a cloud of proofs; I shall, however, add only a
   few, and leave the reader to discover like ones for himself.

   7. The word of God says in Genesis, [4187] "And they gave unto Jacob
   all the strange gods which were in their hand, and the rings which were
   in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem,
   and lost them until this day." Likewise at the end of Deuteronomy,
   [4188] "So Moses the servant of the Lord died there in the land of
   Moab, according to the word of the Lord. And he buried him in the
   valley, in the land of Moab over against Beth-peor: but no man knoweth
   of his sepulchre unto this day." We must certainly understand by this
   day the time of the composition of the history, whether you prefer the
   view that Moses was the author of the Pentateuch or that Ezra re-edited
   it. In either case I make no objection. The question now is whether the
   words unto this day are to be referred to the time of publishing or
   writing the books, and if so it is for him to show, now that so many
   years have rolled away since that day, that either the idols hidden
   beneath the oak have been found, or the grave of Moses discovered; for
   he obstinately maintains that what does not happen so long as the point
   of time indicated by until and unto has not been attained, begins to be
   when that point has been reached. He would do well to pay heed to the
   idiom of Holy Scripture, and understand with us, (it was here he stuck
   in the mud) that some things which might seem ambiguous if not
   expressed are plainly intimated, while others are left to the exercise
   of our intellect. For if, while the event was still fresh in memory and
   men were living who had seen Moses, it was possible for his grave to be
   unknown, much more may this be the case after the lapse of so many
   ages. And in the same way must we interpret what we are told concerning
   Joseph. The Evangelist pointed out a circumstance which might have
   given rise to some scandal, namely, that Mary was not known by her
   husband until she was delivered, and he did so that we might be the
   more certain that she from whom Joseph refrained while there was room
   to doubt the import of the vision was not known after her delivery.

   8. In short, what I want to know is why Joseph refrained until the day
   of her delivery? Helvidius will of course reply, because he heard the
   angel say, [4189] "that which is conceived in her is of the Holy
   Ghost." And in turn we rejoin that he had certainly heard him say,
   [4190] "Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
   wife." The reason why he was forbidden to forsake his wife was that he
   might not think her an adulteress. Is it true then, that he was ordered
   not to have intercourse with his wife? Is it not plain that the warning
   was given him that he might not be separated from her? And could the
   just man dare, he says, to think of approaching her, when he heard that
   the Son of God was in her womb? Excellent! We are to believe then that
   the same man who gave so much credit to a dream that he did not dare to
   touch his wife, yet afterwards, when he had learnt from the shepherds
   that the angel of the Lord had come from heaven and said to them,
   [4191] "Be not afraid: for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy
   which shall be to all people, for there is born to you this day in the
   city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord;" and when the
   heavenly host had joined with him in the chorus [4192] "Glory to God in
   the highest, and on earth peace among men of good will;" and when he
   had seen just Simeon embrace the infant and exclaim, [4193] "Now
   lettest thou thy servant depart, O Lord, according to thy word in
   peace: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation;" and when he had seen
   Anna the prophetess, the Magi, the Star, Herod, the angels; Helvidius,
   I say, would have us believe that Joseph, though well acquainted with
   such surprising wonders, dared to touch the temple of God, the abode of
   the Holy Ghost, the mother of his Lord? Mary at all events "kept all
   these sayings in her heart." You cannot for shame say Joseph did not
   know of them, for Luke tells us, [4194] "His father and mother were
   marvelling at the things which were spoken concerning Him." And yet you
   with marvellous effrontery contend that the reading of the Greek
   manuscripts is corrupt, although it is that which nearly all the Greek
   writers have left us in their books, and not only so, but several of
   the Latin writers have taken the words the same way. Nor need we now
   consider the variations in the copies, since the whole record both of
   the Old and New Testament has since that time been [4195] translated
   into Latin, and we must believe that the water of the fountain flows
   purer than that of the stream.

   9. Helvidius will answer, "What you say, is in my opinion mere
   trifling. Your arguments are so much waste of time, and the discussion
   shows more subtlety than truth. Why could not Scripture say, as it said
   of Thamar and Judah, [4196] And he took his wife, and knew her again no
   more'? Could not Matthew find words to express his meaning? He knew her
   not,' he says, until she brought forth a son.' He did then, after her
   delivery, know her, whom he had refrained from knowing until she was
   delivered."

   10. If you are so contentious, your own thoughts shall now prove your
   master. You must not allow any time to intervene between delivery and
   intercourse. You must not say, [4197] "If a woman conceive seed and
   bear a man child, then she shall be unclean seven days; as in the days
   of the separation of her sickness shall she be unclean. And in the
   eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised. And she
   shall continue in the blood of her purifying three and thirty days. She
   shall touch no hallowed thing," and so forth. On your showing, Joseph
   must at once approach, her, and be subject to Jeremiah's [4198]
   reproof, "They were as mad horses in respect of women: every one
   neighed after his neighbour's wife." Otherwise, how can the words stand
   good, "he knew her not, till she had brought forth a son," if he waits
   after the time of another purifying has expired, if his lust must brook
   another long delay of forty days? The mother must go unpurged from her
   child-bed taint, and the wailing infant be attended to by the midwives,
   while the husband clasps his exhausted wife. Thus forsooth must their
   married life begin so that the Evangelist may not be convicted of
   falsehood. But God forbid that we should think thus of the Saviour's
   mother and of a just man. No midwife assisted at His birth; no women's
   officiousness intervened. With her own hands she wrapped Him in the
   swaddling clothes, herself both mother and midwife, [4199] "and laid
   Him," we are told, "in a manger, because there was no room for them in
   the inn"; a statement which, on the one hand, refutes the ravings of
   the apocryphal accounts, for Mary herself wrapped Him in the swaddling
   clothes, and on the other makes the voluptuous notion of Helvidius
   impossible, since there was no place suitable for married intercourse
   in the inn.

   11. An ample reply has now been given to what he advanced respecting
   the words before they came together, and he knew her not till she had
   brought forth a son. I must now proceed, if my reply is to follow the
   order of his argument, to the third point. He will have it that Mary
   bore other sons, and he quotes the passage, [4200] "And Joseph also
   went up to the city of David to enroll himself with Mary, who was
   betrothed to him, being great with child. And it came to pass, while
   they were there, the days were fulfilled that she should be delivered,
   and she brought forth her first-born son." From this he endeavours to
   show that the term first-born is inapplicable except to a person who
   has brothers, just as he is called only begotten who is the only son of
   his parents.

   12. Our position is this: Every only begotten son is a first-born son,
   but not every first-born is an only begotten. By first-born we
   understand not only one who is succeeded by others, but one who has had
   no predecessor. [4201] "Everything," says the Lord to Aaron, "that
   openeth the womb of all flesh which they offer unto the Lord, both of
   man and beast, shall be thine: nevertheless the first born of man shalt
   thou surely redeem, and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou
   redeem." The word of God defines first-born as everything that openeth
   the womb. Otherwise, if the title belongs to such only as have younger
   brothers, the priests cannot claim the firstlings until their
   successors have been begotten, lest, perchance, in case there were no
   subsequent delivery it should prove to be the first-born but not merely
   the only begotten. [4202] "And those that are to be redeemed of them
   from a month old shalt thou redeem, according to thine estimation for
   the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary (the same
   is twenty gerahs). But the firstling of an ox, or the firstling of a
   sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redeem; they are
   holy." The word of God compels me to dedicate to God everything that
   openeth the womb if it be the firstling of clean beasts: if of unclean
   beasts, I must redeem it, and give the value to the priest. I might
   reply and say, Why do you tie me down to the short space of a month?
   Why do you speak of the first-born, when I cannot tell whether there
   are brothers to follow? Wait until the second is born. I owe nothing to
   the priest, unless the birth of a second should make the one I
   previously had the first-born. Will not the very points of the letters
   cry out against me and convict me of my folly, and declare that
   first-born is a title of him who opens the womb, and is not to be
   restricted to him who has brothers? And, then, to take the case of
   John: we are agreed that he was an only begotten son: I want to know if
   he was not also a first-born son, and whether he was not absolutely
   amenable to the law. There can be no doubt in the matter. At all events
   Scripture thus speaks of the Saviour, [4203] "And when the days of her
   purification according to the law of Moses were fulfilled, they brought
   him up to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord (as it is written in
   the law of the Lord, every male that openeth the womb shall be called
   holy to the Lord) and to offer a sacrifice according to that which is
   said in the law of the Lord, a pair of turtle-doves, or two young
   pigeons." If this law relates only to the first-born, and there can be
   no first-born unless there are successors, no one ought to be bound by
   the law of the first-born who cannot tell whether there will be
   successors. But inasmuch as he who has no younger brothers is bound by
   the law of the first-born, we gather that he is called the first-born
   who opens the womb and who has been preceded by none, not he whose
   birth is followed by that of a younger brother. Moses writes in Exodus,
   [4204] "And it came to pass at midnight, that the Lord smote all the
   first-born in the land of Egypt, from the first-born of Pharaoh that
   sat on his throne unto the first-born of the captive that was in the
   dungeon: And all the first-born of cattle." Tell me, were they who then
   perished by the destroyer, only your first-born, or, something more,
   did they include the only begotten? If only they who have brothers are
   called first-born, the only begotten were saved from death. And if it
   be the fact that the only begotten were slain, it was contrary to the
   sentence pronounced, for the only begotten to die as well as the
   first-born. You must either release the only begotten from the penalty,
   and in that case you become ridiculous: or, if you allow that they were
   slain, we gain our point, though we have not to thank you for it, that
   only begotten sons also are called first-born.

   13. The last proposition of Helvidius was this, and it is what he
   wished to show when he treated of the first-born, that brethren of the
   Lord are mentioned in the Gospels. For example, [4205] "Behold, his
   mother and his brethren stood without, seeking to speak to him." And
   elsewhere, [4206] "After this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his
   mother, and his brethren." And again, [4207] "His brethren therefore
   said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judæa, that thy disciples also
   may behold the works which thou doest. For no man doeth anything in
   secret, and himself seeketh to be known openly. If thou doest these
   things, manifest thyself to the world." And John adds, [4208] "For even
   his brethren did not believe on him." Mark also and Matthew, [4209]
   "And coming into his own country he taught them in their synagogues,
   insomuch that they were astonished, and said, Whence hath this man this
   wisdom, and mighty works? Is not this the carpenter's son? is not his
   mother called Mary? and his brethren James, and Joseph, and Simon, and
   Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us?" Luke also in the
   Acts of the Apostles relates, [4210] "These all with one accord
   continued stedfastly in prayer, with the women and Mary the mother of
   Jesus, and with his brethren." Paul the Apostle also is at one with
   them, and witnesses to their historical accuracy, [4211] "And I went up
   by revelation, but other of the apostles saw I none, save Peter and
   James the Lord's brother." And again in another place, [4212] "Have we
   no right to eat and drink? Have we no right to lead about wives even as
   the rest of the Apostles, and the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?"
   And for fear any one should not allow the evidence of the Jews, since
   it was they from whose mouth we hear the name of His brothers, but
   should maintain that His countrymen were deceived by the same error in
   respect of the brothers into which they fell in their belief about the
   father, Helvidius utters a sharp note of warning and cries, "The same
   names are repeated by the Evangelists in another place, and the same
   persons are there brethren of the Lord and sons of Mary." Matthew says,
   [4213] "And many women were there (doubtless at the Lord's cross)
   beholding from afar, which had followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering
   unto him: among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James
   and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee." Mark also, [4214]
   "And there were also women beholding from afar, among whom were both
   Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and
   Salome"; and in the same place shortly after, "And many other women
   which came up with him unto Jerusalem." Luke too, [4215] "Now there
   were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and the
   other women with them."

   14. My reason for repeating the same thing again and again is to
   prevent him from raising a false issue and crying out that I have
   withheld such passages as make for him, and that his view has been torn
   to shreds not by evidence of Scripture, but by evasive arguments.
   Observe, he says, James and Joses are sons of Mary, and the same
   persons who were called brethren by the Jews. Observe, Mary is the
   mother of James the less and of Joses. And James is called the less to
   distinguish him from James the greater, who was the son of Zebedee, as
   Mark elsewhere states, [4216] "And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother
   of Joses beheld where he was laid. And when the sabbath was past, they
   bought spices, that they might come and anoint him." And, as might be
   expected, he says: "What a poor and impious view we take of Mary, if we
   hold that when other women were concerned about the burial of Jesus,
   she His mother was absent; or if we invent some kind of a second Mary;
   and all the more because the Gospel of S. John testifies that she was
   there present, when the Lord upon the cross commended her, as His
   mother and now a widow, to the care of John. Or must we suppose that
   the Evangelists were so far mistaken and so far mislead us as to call
   Mary the mother of those who were known to the Jews as brethren of
   Jesus?"

   15. What darkness, what raging madness rushing to its own destruction!
   You say that the mother of the Lord was present at the cross, you say
   that she was entrusted to the disciple John on account of her widowhood
   and solitary condition: as if upon your own showing, she had not four
   sons, and numerous daughters, with whose solace she might comfort
   herself? You also apply to her the name of widow which is not found in
   Scripture. And although you quote all instances in the Gospels, the
   words of John alone displease you. You say in passing that she was
   present at the cross, that you may not appear to have omitted it on
   purpose, and yet not a word about the women who were with her. I could
   pardon you if you were ignorant, but I see you have a reason for your
   silence. Let me point out then what John says, [4217] "But there were
   standing by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister,
   Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene." No one doubts that there
   were two apostles called by the name James, James the son of Zebedee,
   and James the son of Alphæus. Do you intend the comparatively unknown
   James the less, who is called in Scripture the son of Mary, not however
   of Mary the mother of our Lord, to be an apostle, or not? If he is an
   apostle, he must be the son of Alphæus and a believer in Jesus, "For
   neither did his brethren believe in him." If he is not an apostle, but
   a third James (who he can be I cannot tell), how can he be regarded as
   the Lord's brother, and how, being a third, can he be called less to
   distinguish him from greater, when greater and less are used to denote
   the relations existing, not between three, but between two? Notice,
   moreover, that the Lord's brother is an apostle, since Paul says,
   [4218] "Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit Cephas,
   and tarried with him fifteen days. But other of the Apostles saw I
   none, save James the Lord's brother." And in the same Epistle, [4219]
   "And when they perceived the grace that was given unto me, James and
   Cephas and John, who were reputed to be pillars," etc. And that you may
   not suppose this James to be the son of Zebedee, you have only to read
   the Acts of the Apostles, and you will find that the latter had already
   been slain by Herod. The only conclusion is that the Mary who is
   described as the mother of James the less was the wife of Alphæus and
   sister of Mary the Lord's mother, the one who is called by John the
   Evangelist "Mary of Clopas," whether after her father, or kindred, or
   for some other reason. But if you think they are two persons because
   elsewhere we read, "Mary the mother of James the less," and here, "Mary
   of Clopas," you have still to learn that it is customary in Scripture
   for the same individual to bear different names. Raguel, Moses'
   father-in-law, is also called Jethro. Gedeon, [4220] without any
   apparent reason for the change, all at once becomes Jerubbaal. Ozias,
   king of Judah, has an alternative, Azarias. Mount Tabor is called
   Itabyrium. Again Hermon is called by the Phenicians Sanior, and by the
   Amorites Sanir. The same tract of country is known by three names,
   [4221] Negebh, Teman, and Darom in Ezekiel. Peter is also called Simon
   and Cephas. Judas the zealot in another Gospel is called Thaddaeus. And
   there are numerous other examples which the reader will be able to
   collect for himself from every part of Scripture.

   16. Now here we have the explanation of what I am endeavouring to show,
   how it is that the sons of Mary, the sister of our Lord's mother, who
   though not formerly believers afterwards did believe, can be called
   brethren of the Lord. Possibly the case might be that one of the
   brethren believed immediately while the others did not believe until
   long after, and that one Mary was the mother of James and Joses,
   namely, "Mary of Clopas," who is the same as the wife of Alphæus, the
   other, the mother of James the less. In any case, if she (the latter)
   had been the Lord's mother S. John would have allowed her the title, as
   everywhere else, and would not by calling her the mother of other sons
   have given a wrong impression. But at this stage I do not wish to argue
   for or against the supposition that Mary the wife of Clopas and Mary
   the mother of James and Joses were different women, provided it is
   clearly understood that Mary the mother of James and Joses was not the
   same person as the Lord's mother. How then, says Helvidius, do you make
   out that they were called the Lord's brethren who were not his
   brethren? I will show how that is. In Holy Scripture there are four
   kinds of brethren--by nature, race, kindred, love. Instances of
   brethren by nature are Esau and Jacob, the twelve patriarchs, Andrew
   and Peter, James and John. As to race, all Jews are called brethren of
   one another, as in Deuteronomy, [4222] "If thy brother, an Hebrew man,
   or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years; then
   in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee." And in the
   same book, [4223] "Thou shalt in anywise set him king over thee, whom
   the Lord thy God shall choose: one from among thy brethren shalt thou
   set king over thee; thou mayest not put a foreigner over thee, which is
   not thy brother." And again, [4224] "Thou shalt not see thy brother's
   ox or his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt
   surely bring them again unto thy brother. And if thy brother be not
   nigh unto thee, or if thou know him not, then thou shalt bring it home
   to thine house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother seek after
   it, and thou shalt restore it to him again." And the Apostle Paul says,
   [4225] "I could wish that I myself were anathema from Christ for my
   brethren's sake, my kinsmen according to the flesh: who are
   Israelites." Moreover they are called brethren by kindred who are of
   one family, that is patria, which corresponds to the Latin paternitas,
   because from a single root a numerous progeny proceeds. In Genesis
   [4226] we read, "And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I
   pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen;
   for we are brethren." And again, "So Lot chose him all the plain of
   Jordan, and Lot journeyed east: and they separated each from his
   brother." Certainly Lot was not Abraham's brother, but the son of
   Abraham's brother Aram. For Terah begat Abraham and Nahor and Aram: and
   Aram begat Lot. Again we read, [4227] "And Abram was seventy and five
   years old when he departed out of Haran. And Abram took Sarai his wife,
   and Lot his brother's son." But if you still doubt whether a nephew can
   be called a son, let me give you an instance. [4228] "And when Abram
   heard that his brother was taken captive, he led forth his trained men,
   born in his house, three hundred and eighteen." And after describing
   the night attack and the slaughter, he adds, "And he brought back all
   the goods, and also brought again his brother Lot." Let this suffice by
   way of proof of my assertion. But for fear you may make some cavilling
   objection, and wriggle out of your difficulty like a snake, I must bind
   you fast with the bonds of proof to stop your hissing and complaining,
   for I know you would like to say you have been overcome not so much by
   Scripture truth as by intricate arguments. Jacob, the son of Isaac and
   Rebecca, when in fear of his brother's treachery he had gone to
   Mesopotamia, drew nigh and rolled away the stone from the mouth of the
   well, and watered the flocks of Laban, his mother's brother. [4229]
   "And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept. And Jacob
   told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that he was Rebekah's
   son." Here is an example of the rule already referred to, by which a
   nephew is called a brother. And again, [4230] "Laban said unto Jacob.
   Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for
   nought? Tell me what shall thy wages be." And so, when, at the end of
   twenty years, without the knowledge of his father-in-law and
   accompanied by his wives and sons he was returning to his country, on
   Laban overtaking him in the mountain of Gilead and failing to find the
   idols which Rachel hid among the baggage, Jacob answered and said to
   Laban, [4231] "What is my trespass? What is my sin, that thou hast so
   hotly pursued after me? Whereas thou hast felt all about my stuff, what
   hast thou found of all thy household stuff? Set it here before my
   brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us two." Tell me
   who are those brothers of Jacob and Laban who were present there? Esau,
   Jacob's brother, was certainly not there, and Laban, the son of
   Bethuel, had no brothers although he had a sister Rebecca.

   17. Innumerable instances of the same kind are to be found in the
   sacred books. But, to be brief, I will return to the last of the four
   classes of brethren, those, namely, who are brethren by affection, and
   these again fall into two divisions, those of the spiritual and those
   of the general relationship. I say spiritual because all of us
   Christians are called brethren, as in the verse, [4232] "Behold, how
   good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity."
   And in another psalm the Saviour says, [4233] "I will declare thy name
   unto my brethren." And elsewhere, [4234] "Go unto my brethren and say
   to them." I say also general, because we are all children of one
   Father, there is a like bond of brotherhood between us all. [4235]
   "Tell these who hate you," says the prophet, "ye are our brethren." And
   the Apostle writing to the Corinthians: [4236] "If any man that is
   named brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a
   reviler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner: with such a one no, not to
   eat." I now ask to which class you consider the Lord's brethren in the
   Gospel must be assigned. They are brethren by nature, you say. But
   Scripture does not say so; it calls them neither sons of Mary, nor of
   Joseph. Shall we say they are brethren by race? But it is absurd to
   suppose that a few Jews were called His brethren when all Jews of the
   time might upon this principle have borne the title. Were they brethren
   by virtue of close intimacy and the union of heart and mind? If that
   were so, who were more truly His brethren than the apostles who
   received His private instruction and were called by Him His mother and
   His brethren? Again, if all men, as such, were His brethren, it would
   have been foolish to deliver a special message, "Behold, thy brethren
   seek thee," for all men alike were entitled to the name. The only
   alternative is to adopt the previous explanation and understand them to
   be called brethren in virtue of the bond of kindred, not of love and
   sympathy, nor by prerogative of race, nor yet by nature. Just as Lot
   was called Abraham's brother, and Jacob Laban's, just as the daughters
   of Zelophehad received a lot among their brethren, just as Abraham
   himself had to wife Sarah his sister, for he says, [4237] "She is
   indeed my sister, on the father's side, not on the mother's," that is
   to say, she was the daughter of his brother, not of his sister.
   Otherwise, what are we to say of Abraham, a just man, taking to wife
   the daughter of his own father? Scripture, in relating the history of
   the men of early times, does not outrage our ears by speaking of the
   enormity in express terms, but prefers to leave it to be inferred by
   the reader: and God afterwards gives to the prohibition the sanction of
   the law, and threatens, [4238] "He who takes his sister, born of his
   father, or of his mother, and beholds her nakedness, hath commited
   abomination, he shall be utterly destroyed. He hath uncovered his
   sister's nakedness, he shall bear his sin."

   18. There are things which, in your extreme ignorance, you had never
   read, and therefore you neglected the whole range of Scripture and
   employed your madness in outraging the Virgin, like the man in the
   story who being unknown to everybody and finding that he could devise
   no good deed by which to gain renown, burned the temple of Diana: and
   when no one revealed the sacrilegious act, it is said that he himself
   went up and down proclaiming that he was the man who had applied the
   fire. The rulers of Ephesus were curious to know what made him do this
   thing, whereupon he replied that if he could not have fame for good
   deeds, all men should give him credit for bad ones. Grecian history
   relates the incident. But you do worse. You have set on fire the temple
   of the Lord's body, you have defiled the sanctuary of the Holy Spirit
   from which you are determined to make a team of four brethren and a
   heap of sisters come forth. In a word, joining in the chorus of the
   Jews, you say, [4239] "Is not this the carpenter's son? is not his
   mother called Mary? and his brethren James, and Joseph, and Simon, and
   Judas? and his sisters, are they not all with us? The word all would
   not be used if there were not a crowd of them." Pray tell me, who,
   before you appeared, was acquainted with this blasphemy? who thought
   the theory worth two-pence? You have gained your desire, and are become
   notorious by crime. For myself who am your opponent, although we live
   in the [4240] same city, I don't know, as the saying is, whether you
   are white or black. I pass over faults of diction which abound in every
   book you write. I say not a word about your absurd introduction. Good
   heavens! I do not ask for eloquence, since, having none yourself, you
   applied for a supply of it to your brother Craterius. I do not ask for
   grace of style, I look for purity of soul: for with Christians it is
   the greatest of solecisms and of vices of style to introduce anything
   base either in word or action. I am come to the conclusion of my
   argument. I will deal with you as though I had as yet prevailed
   nothing; and you will find yourself on the horns of a dilemma. It is
   clear that our Lord's brethren bore the name in the same way that
   Joseph was called his father: [4241] "I and thy father sought thee
   sorrowing." It was His mother who said this, not the Jews. The
   Evangelist himself relates that His father and His mother were
   marvelling at the things which were spoken concerning Him, and there
   are similar passages which we have already quoted in which Joseph and
   Mary are called his parents. Seeing that you have been foolish enough
   to persuade yourself that the Greek manuscripts are corrupt, you will
   perhaps plead the diversity of readings. I therefore come to the Gospel
   of John, and there it is plainly written, [4242] "Philip findeth
   Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him of whom Moses in the
   law, and the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph."
   You will certainly find this in your manuscript. Now tell me, how is
   Jesus the son of Joseph when it is clear that He was begotten of the
   Holy Ghost? Was Joseph His true father? Dull as you are, you will not
   venture to say that. Was he His reputed father? If so, let the same
   rule be applied to them when they are called brethren, that you apply
   to Joseph when he is called father.

   19. Now that I have cleared the rocks and shoals I must spread sail and
   make all speed to reach his epilogue. Feeling himself to be a
   smatterer, he there produces Tertullian as a witness and quotes the
   words of Victorinus bishop of [4243] Petavium. Of Tertullian I say no
   more than that he did not belong to the Church. But as regards
   Victorinus, I assert what has already been proved from the Gospel--that
   he spoke of the brethren of the Lord not as being sons of Mary, but
   brethren in the sense I have explained, that is to say, brethren in
   point of kinship not by nature. We are, however, spending our strength
   on trifles, and, leaving the fountain of truth, are following the tiny
   streams of opinion. Might I not array against you the whole series of
   ancient writers? Ignatius, Polycarp, Irenæus, Justin Martyr, and many
   other apostolic and eloquent men, who against Ebion, Theodotus of
   Byzantium, and Valentinus, held these same views, and wrote volumes
   replete with wisdom. If you had ever read what they wrote, you would be
   a wiser man. But I think it better to reply briefly to each point than
   to linger any longer and extend my book to an undue length.

   20. I now direct the attack against the passage in which, wishing to
   show your cleverness, you institute a comparison between virginity and
   marriage. I could not forbear smiling, and I thought of the proverb,
   did you ever see a camel dance? "Are virgins better," you ask, "than
   Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were married men? Are not infants daily
   fashioned by the hands of God in the wombs of their mothers? And if so,
   are we bound to blush at the thought of Mary having a husband after she
   was delivered? If they find any disgrace in this, they ought not
   consistently even to believe that God was born of the Virgin by natural
   delivery. For according to them there is more dishonour in a virgin
   giving birth to God by the organs of generation, than in a virgin being
   joined to her own husband after she has been delivered." Add, if you
   like, Helvidius, the other humiliations of nature, the womb for nine
   months growing larger, the sickness, the delivery, the blood, the
   swaddling-clothes. Picture to yourself the infant in the enveloping
   membranes. Introduce into your picture the hard manger, the wailing of
   the infant, the circumcision on the eighth day, the time of
   purification, so that he may be proved to be unclean. We do not blush,
   we are not put to silence. The greater the humiliations He endured for
   me, the more I owe Him. And when you have given every detail, you will
   be able to produce nothing more shameful than the cross, which we
   confess, in which we believe, and by which we triumph over our enemies.

   21. But as we do not deny what is written, so we do reject what is not
   written. We believe that God was born of the Virgin, because we read
   it. That Mary was married after she brought forth, we do not believe,
   because we do not read it. Nor do we say this to condemn marriage, for
   virginity itself is the fruit of marriage; but because when we are
   dealing with saints we must not judge rashly. If we adopt possibility
   as the standard of judgment, we might maintain that Joseph had several
   wives because Abraham had, and so had Jacob, and that the Lord's
   brethren were the issue of those wives, an invention which some hold
   with a rashness which springs from audacity not from piety. You say
   that Mary did not continue a virgin: I claim still more, that Joseph
   himself on account of Mary was a virgin, so that from a virgin wedlock
   a virgin son was born. For if as a holy man he does not come under the
   imputation of fornication, and it is nowhere written that he had
   another wife, but was the guardian of Mary whom he was supposed to have
   to wife rather than her husband, the conclusion is that he who was
   thought worthy to be called father of the Lord, remained a virgin.

   22. And now that I am about to institute a comparison between virginity
   and marriage, I beseech my readers not to suppose that in praising
   virginity I have in the least disparaged marriage, and separated the
   saints of the Old Testament from those of the New, that is to say,
   those who had wives and those who altogether refrained from the
   embraces of women: I rather think that in accordance with the
   difference in time and circumstance one rule applied to the former,
   another to us upon whom the ends of the world have come. So long as
   that law remained, [4244] "Be fruitful, and multiply and replenish the
   earth"; and [4245] "Cursed is the barren woman that beareth not seed in
   Israel," they all married and were given in marriage, left father and
   mother, and became one flesh. But once in tones of thunder the words
   were heard, [4246] "The time is shortened, that henceforth those that
   have wives may be as though they had none": cleaving to the Lord, we
   are made one spirit with Him. And why? [4247] Because "He that is
   unmarried is careful for the things of the Lord, how he may please the
   Lord: but he that is married is careful for the things of the world,
   how he may please his wife. And there is a difference also between the
   wife and the virgin. She that is unmarried is careful for the things of
   the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit: but she that
   is married is careful for the things of the world, how she may please
   her husband." Why do you cavil? Why do you resist? The vessel of
   election says this; he tells us that there is a difference between the
   wife and the virgin. Observe what the happiness of that state must be
   in which even the distinction of sex is lost. The virgin is no longer
   called a woman. [4248] "She that is unmarried is careful for the things
   of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit." A virgin
   is defined as she that is holy in body and in spirit, for it is no good
   to have virgin flesh if a woman be married in mind.

   "But she that is married is careful for the things of the world, how
   she may please her husband." Do you think there is no difference
   between one who spends her time in prayer and fasting, and one who
   must, at her husband's approach, make up her countenance, walk with
   mincing gait, and feign a shew of endearment? The virgin's aim is to
   appear less comely; she will wrong herself so as to hide her natural
   attractions. The married woman has the paint laid on before her mirror,
   and, to the insult of her Maker, strives to acquire something more than
   her natural beauty. Then come the prattling of infants, the noisy
   household, children watching for her word and waiting for her kiss, the
   reckoning up of expenses, the preparation to meet the outlay. On one
   side you will see a company of cooks, girded for the onslaught and
   attacking the meat: there you may hear the hum of a multitude of
   weavers. Meanwhile a message is delivered that the husband and his
   friends have arrived. The wife, like a swallow, flies all over the
   house. "She has to see to everything. Is the sofa smooth? Is the
   pavement swept? Are the flowers in the cups? Is dinner ready?" Tell me,
   pray, where amid all this is there room for the thought of God? Are
   these happy homes? Where there is the beating of drums, the noise and
   clatter of pipe and lute, the clanging of cymbals, can any fear of God
   be found? The parasite is snubbed and feels proud of the honour. Enter
   next the half-naked victims of the passions, a mark for every lustful
   eye. The unhappy wife must either take pleasure in them, and perish, or
   be displeased, and provoke her husband. Hence arises discord, the
   seed-plot of divorce. Or suppose you find me a house where these things
   are unknown, which is a rara avis indeed! yet even there the very
   management of the household, the education of the children, the wants
   of the husband, the correction of the servants, cannot fail to call
   away the mind from the thought of God. [4249] "It had ceased to be with
   Sarah after the manner of women": so the Scripture says, and afterwards
   Abraham received the command, [4250] "In all that Sarah saith unto
   thee, hearken unto her voice." She who is not subject to the anxiety
   and pain of child-bearing and having passed the change of life has
   ceased to perform the functions of a woman, is freed from the curse of
   God: nor is her desire to her husband, but on the contrary her husband
   becomes subject to her, and the voice of the Lord commands him, "In all
   that Sarah saith unto thee, hearken unto her voice." Thus they begin to
   have time for prayer. For so long as the debt of marriage is paid,
   earnest prayer is neglected.

   23. I do not deny that holy women are found both among widows and those
   who have husbands; but they are such as have ceased to be wives, or
   such as, even in the close bond of marriage, imitate virgin chastity.
   The Apostle, Christ speaking in him, briefly bore witness to this when
   he said, [4251] "She that is unmarried is careful for the things of the
   Lord, how she may please the Lord: but she that is married is careful
   for the things of the world, how she may please her husband." He leaves
   us the free exercise of our reason in the matter. He lays no necessity
   upon anyone nor leads anyone into a snare: he only persuades to that
   which is proper when he wishes all men to be as himself. He had not, it
   is true, a commandment from the Lord respecting virginity, for that
   grace surpasses the unassisted power of man, and it would have worn an
   air of immodesty to force men to fly in the face of nature, and to say
   in other words, I want you to be what the angels are. It is this
   angelic purity which secures to virginity its highest reward, and the
   Apostle might have seemed to despise a course of life which involves no
   guilt. Nevertheless in the immediate context he adds, [4252] "But I
   give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be
   faithful. I think therefore that this is good by reason of the present
   distress, namely, that it is good for a man to be as he is." What is
   meant by present distress? [4253] "Woe unto them that are with child
   and to them that give suck in those days!" The reason why the wood
   grows up is that it may be cut down. The field is sown that it may be
   reaped. The world is already full, and the population is too large for
   the soil. Every day we are being cut down by war, snatched away by
   disease, swallowed up by shipwreck, although we go to law with one
   another about the fences of our property. It is only one addition to
   the general rule which is made by those who follow the Lamb, and who
   have not defiled their garments, for they have continued in their
   virgin state. Notice the meaning of defiling. I shall not venture to
   explain it, for fear Helvidius may be abusive. I agree with you, when
   you say, that some virgins are nothing but tavern women; I say still
   more, that even adulteresses may be found among them, and, you will no
   doubt be still more surprised to hear, that some of the clergy are
   inn-keepers and some monks unchaste. Who does not at once understand
   that a tavern woman cannot be a virgin, nor an adulterer a monk, nor a
   clergy-man a tavern-keeper? Are we to blame virginity if its
   counterfeit is at fault? For my part, to pass over other persons and
   come to the virgin, I maintain that she who is engaged in huckstering,
   though for anything I know she may be a virgin in body, is no longer
   one in spirit.

   24. I have become rhetorical, and have disported myself a little like a
   platform orator. You compelled me, Helvidius; for, brightly as the
   Gospel shines at the present day, you will have it that equal glory
   attaches to virginity and to the marriage state. And because I think
   that, finding the truth too strong for you, you will turn to
   disparaging my life and abusing my character (it is the way of weak
   women to talk tittle-tattle in corners when they have been put down by
   their masters), I shall anticipate you. I assure you that I shall
   regard your railing as a high distinction, since the same lips that
   assail me have disparaged Mary, and I, a servant of the Lord, am
   favoured with the same barking eloquence as His mother.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4168] Ut ait ille. The sentiment, almost in the same words, is found
   in Tertullian against Hermogenes, ch. 1.

   [4169] i. 18 sq.

   [4170] S. Matt. i. 24, 25.

   [4171] Ps. vi. 5.

   [4172] Deut. xxii. 24, 25.

   [4173] Deut. xxii. 23, 24.

   [4174] Deut. xx. 7.

   [4175] Is. vii. 14. See Cheyne's Isaiah, and critical note.

   [4176] S. Luke ii. 27.

   [4177] S. Luke ii. 41.

   [4178] ib. ii. 43.

   [4179] ib. i. 34.

   [4180] S. Luke ii. 48.

   [4181] S. Matt. i. 20.

   [4182] Is. xlvi. 4.

   [4183] S. Matt. xxviii. 20.

   [4184] 1 Cor. xv. 23 sq.

   [4185] Ps. cxxiii. 2. The songs of the up-goings or ascents (ton
   anabaOmon Sept., graduum Vulg.), are the fifteen psalms cxx.-cxxxiv.

   [4186] Ps. cxix. 123.

   [4187] Gen. xxxv. 4, Sept.

   [4188] Deut. xxxiv. 5-6.

   [4189] S. Matt. i. 20.

   [4190] S. Matt. i. 20.

   [4191] S. Luke ii. 10 sq.

   [4192] S. Luke ii. 14.

   [4193] ib. ii. 29.

   [4194] S. Luke ii. 33.

   [4195] The allusion is to the Old Latin, the Versio Itala. The
   quotations which follow stand differently in Jerome's Vulgate, made
   subsequently (391-404). The argument is that, since the copies of the
   Latin version substantially agree in the present case, it is futile to
   suppose variations in the original.

   [4196] Gen. xxxviii. 26.

   [4197] Lev. xii. 2-3 margin.

   [4198] Jer. v. 8.

   [4199] S. Luke ii. 7.

   [4200] S. Luke ii. 4 sq.

   [4201] Numb. xviii. 15.

   [4202] Numb. xviii. 16.

   [4203] S. Luke ii. 22 sq.

   [4204] Exod. xii. 29.

   [4205] S. Matt. xii. 46.

   [4206] S. John ii. 12.

   [4207] S. John vii. 3, 4.

   [4208] S. John vii. 5.

   [4209] S. Matt. xiii. 54, 55. S. Mark vi. 1-3.

   [4210] Acts i. 14.

   [4211] Gal. ii. 2; i. 19.

   [4212] 1 Cor. ix. 4, 5.

   [4213] S. Matt. xxvii. 55, 56. For Joses, Jerome has Joseph.

   [4214] S. Mark xv. 40, 41. For Joses, Jerome has Joseph.

   [4215] S. Luke xxiv. 10.

   [4216] S. Mark xv. 47; xvi. 1.

   [4217] S. John xix. 25.

   [4218] Gal. i. 18, 19.

   [4219] Gal. ii. 9.

   [4220] But see Judges vi. 2.

   [4221] The Heb. Negebh signifies South, and it is probable that the
   land of Teman was a southern portion of the land of Edom. If Darom be
   the right reading, it is, apparently, the same as Dedan (Ezek. xxv. 13,
   etc.).

   [4222] Deut. xv. 12.

   [4223] Deut. xvii. 15.

   [4224] Deut. xxii. 1.

   [4225] Rom. ix. 3, 4.

   [4226] Gen. xiii. 8, 11.

   [4227] Gen. xii. 4.

   [4228] Gen. xiv. 14.

   [4229] Gen. xxix. 11.

   [4230] Gen. xxix. 15.

   [4231] Gen. xxxi. 36, 37.

   [4232] Ps. cxxxiii. 1.

   [4233] Ps. xxii. 22.

   [4234] S. John xx. 17.

   [4235] Is. lxvi. 5.

   [4236] 1 Cor. v. 11.

   [4237] Gen. xx. 11.

   [4238] Lev. xviii. 9.

   [4239] S. Matt. xiii. 55: S. Mark vi. 3.

   [4240] That is, Rome.

   [4241] S. Luke i. 18.

   [4242] S. John i. 45.

   [4243] That is, Pettau in Upper Pannonia. See Jerome, De Vir. Ill. 74.

   [4244] Gen. i. 28.

   [4245] Probably a mistranslation of Exod. xxiii. 26.

   [4246] 1 Cor. vii. 29.

   [4247] ib. vii. 32, 33.

   [4248] 1 Cor. vii. 34.

   [4249] Gen. xviii. 11.

   [4250] Gen. xxi. 12.

   [4251] 1 Cor. vii. 34.

   [4252] 1 Cor. vii. 25.

   [4253] Matt. xxiv. 19: S. Mark xiii. 17.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Against Jovinianus.

   ------------------------

   Book I.

   Jovinianus, concerning whom we know little more than is to be found in
   the two following books, had published at Rome a Latin treatise
   containing all, or part of the opinions here controverted, viz. (1)
   "That a virgin is no better as such than a wife in the sight of God.
   (2) Abstinence is no better than a thankful partaking of food. (3) A
   person baptized with the Spirit as well as with water cannot sin. (4)
   All sins are equal. (5) There is but one grade of punishment and one of
   reward in the future state." In addition to this he held the birth of
   our Lord to have been by a "true parturition," and was thus at issue
   with the orthodoxy of the time, according to which the infant Jesus
   passed through the walls of the womb as His Resurrection body
   afterwards did out of the tomb or through the closed doors. Pammachius,
   Jerome's friend, brought Jovinian's book under the notice of Siricius,
   bishop of Rome, and it was shortly afterwards condemned in synods at
   that city and at Milan (about a.d. 390). He subsequently sent
   Jovinian's books to Jerome, who answered them in the present treatise
   in the year 393. Nothing more is known of Jovinian, but it has been
   conjectured from Jerome's remark in the treatise against Vigilantius,
   where Jovinian is said to have "amidst pheasants and pork rather
   belched out than breathed out his life," and by a kind of
   transmigration to have transmitted his opinions into Vigilantius, that
   he had died before 409, the date of that work.

   The first book is wholly on the first proposition of Jovinianus, that
   relating to marriage and virginity. The first three chapters are
   introductory. The rest may be divided into three parts:

   1 (ch. 4-13). An exposition, in Jerome's sense, of St. Paul's teaching
   in 1 Cor. vii.

   2 (ch. 14-39). A statement of the teaching which Jerome derives from
   the various books of both the Old and the New Testaments.

   3. A denunciation of Jovinianus (c. 40), and the praises of virginity
   and of single marriages derived from examples in the heathen world.

   The treatise gives a remarkable specimen of Jerome's system of
   interpreting Scripture, and also of the methods by which asceticism was
   introduced into the Church, and marriage brought into disesteem.

   1. Very few days have elapsed since the holy brethren of Rome sent to
   me the treatises of a certain Jovinian with the request that I would
   reply to the follies contained in them, and would crush with
   evangelical and apostolic vigour the [4254] Epicurus of Christianity. I
   read but could not in the least comprehend them. I began therefore to
   give them closer attention, and to thoroughly sift not only words and
   sentences, but almost every single syllable; for I wished first to
   ascertain his meaning, and then to approve, or refute what he had said.
   But the style is so barbarous, and the language so vile and such a heap
   of blunders, that I could neither understand what he was talking about,
   nor by what arguments he was trying to prove his points. At one moment
   he is all bombast, at another he grovels: from time to time he lifts
   himself up, and then like a wounded snake finds his own effort too much
   for him. Not satisfied with the language of men, he attempts something
   loftier.

   [4255] "The mountains labour; a poor mouse is born."

   [4256] "That he's gone mad ev'n mad Orestes swears."

   Moreover he involves everything in such inextricable confusion that the
   saying of [4257] Plautus might be applied to him:--"This is what none
   but a Sibyl will ever read."

   To understand him we must be prophets. We read Apollo's [4258] raving
   prophetesses. We remember, too, what [4259] Virgil says of senseless
   noise. [4260] Heraclitus, also, surnamed the Obscure, the philosophers
   find hard to understand even with their utmost toil. But what are they
   compared with our riddle-maker, whose books are much more difficult to
   comprehend than to refute? Although (we must confess) the task of
   refuting them is no easy one. For how can you overcome a man when you
   are quite in the dark as to his meaning? But, not to be tedious to my
   reader, the introduction to his second book, of which he has discharged
   himself like a sot after a night's debauch, will show the character of
   his eloquence, and through what bright flowers of rhetoric he takes his
   stately course.

   2. "I respond to your invitation, not that I may go through life with a
   high reputation, but may live free from idle rumour. I beseech the
   ground, the young shoots of our plantations, the plants and trees of
   tenderness snatched from the whirlpool of vice, to grant me audience
   and the support of many listeners. We know that the Church through
   hope, faith, charity, is inaccessible and impregnable. In it no one is
   immature: all are apt to learn: none can force a way into it by
   violence, or deceive it by craft."

   3. What, I ask, is the meaning of these portentous words and of this
   grotesque description? Would you not think he was in a feverish dream,
   or that he was seized with madness and ought to be put into the strait
   jacket which Hippocrates prescribed? However often I read him, even
   till my heart sinks within me, I am still in uncertainty of his
   meaning. [4261] Everything starts from, everything depends upon,
   something else. It is impossible to make out any connection; and,
   excepting the proofs from Scripture which he has not dared to exchange
   for his own lovely flowers of rhetoric, his words suit all matter
   equally well, because they suit no matter at all. This circumstance led
   me shrewdly to suspect that his object in proclaiming the excellence of
   marriage was only to disparage virginity. For when the less is put upon
   a level with the greater, the lower profits by comparison, but the
   higher suffers wrong. For ourselves, we do not follow the views of
   [4262] Marcion and Manichæus, and disparage marriage; nor, deceived by
   the error of [4263] Tatian, the leader of the Encratites, do we think
   all intercourse impure; he condemns and rejects not only marriage but
   also food which God created for the use of man. We know that in a great
   house, there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood
   and earthenware. And that upon the foundation, Christ, which Paul the
   master-builder laid, some build gold, silver, precious stones: others,
   on the contrary, hay, wood, straw. We are not ignorant of the words,
   [4264] "Marriage is honourable among all, and the bed undefiled." We
   have read God's first command, [4265] "Be fruitful, and multiply, and
   replenish the earth"; but while we honour marriage we prefer virginity
   which is the offspring of marriage. Will silver cease to be silver, if
   gold is more precious than silver? Or is despite done to tree and corn,
   if we prefer the fruit to root and foliage, or the grain to stalk and
   ear? Virginity is to marriage what fruit is to the tree, or grain to
   the straw. Although the hundred-fold, the sixty-fold, and the
   thirty-fold spring from one earth and from one sowing, yet there is a
   great difference in respect of number. The thirty-fold has reference to
   marriage. The very way the [4266] fingers are combined--see how they
   seem to embrace, tenderly kiss, and pledge their troth either to
   other--is a picture of husband and wife. The sixty-fold applies to
   widows, because they are placed in a position of difficulty and
   distress. Hence the upper finger signifies their depression, and the
   greater the difficulty in resisting the allurements of pleasure once
   experienced, the greater the reward. Moreover (give good heed, my
   reader), to denote a hundred, the right hand is used instead of the
   left: a circle is made with the same fingers which on the left hand
   represented widowhood, and thus the crown of virginity is expressed. In
   saying this I have followed my own impatient spirit rather than the
   course of the argument. For I had scarcely left harbour, and had barely
   hoisted sail, when a swelling tide of words suddenly swept me into the
   depths of the discussion. I must stay my course, and take in canvas for
   a little while; nor will I indulge my sword, anxious as it is to strike
   a blow for virginity. The farther back the catapult is drawn, the
   greater the force of the missile. To linger is not to lose, if by
   lingering victory is better assured. I will briefly set forth our
   adversary's views, and will drag them out from his books like snakes
   from the holes where they hide, and will separate the venomous head
   from the writhing body. What is baneful shall be discovered, that, when
   we have the power, it may be crushed.

   He says that "virgins, widows, and married women, who have been once
   passed through the laver of Christ, if they are on a par in other
   respects, are of equal merit."

   He endeavours to show that "they who with full assurance of faith have
   been born again in baptism, cannot be overthrown by the devil."

   His third point is "that there is no difference between abstinence from
   food, and its reception with thanksgiving."

   The fourth and last is "that there is one reward in the kingdom of
   heaven for all who have kept their baptismal vow."

   4. This is the hissing of the old serpent; by counsel such as this the
   dragon drove man from Paradise. For he promised that if they would
   prefer fulness to fasting they should be immortal, as though it were an
   impossibility for them to fall; and while he promises they shall be as
   Gods, he drives them from Paradise, with the result that they who,
   while naked and unhampered, and as virgins unspotted enjoyed the
   fellowship of the Lord were cast down into the vale of tears, and sewed
   skins together to clothe themselves withal. But, not to detain the
   reader any longer, I will keep to the division given above and taking
   his propositions one by one will rely chiefly on the evidence of
   Scripture to refute them, for fear he may chatter and complain that he
   was overcome by rhetorical skill rather than by force of truth. If I
   succeed in this and with the aid of a cloud of witnesses from both
   Testaments prove too strong for him, I will then accept his challenge,
   and adduce illustrations from secular literature. I will show that even
   among philosophers and distinguished statesmen, the virtuous are wont
   to be preferred by all to the voluptuous, that is to say men like
   [4267] Pythagoras, [4268] Plato and [4269] Aristides, to [4270]
   Aristippus, [4271] Epicurus and [4272] Alcibiades. I entreat virgins of
   both sexes and all such as are continent, the married also and the
   twice married, to assist my efforts with their prayers. Jovinian is the
   common enemy. For he who maintains all to be of equal merit, does no
   less injury to virginity in comparing it with marriage than he does to
   marriage, when he allows it to be lawful, but to the same extent as
   second and third marriages. But to digamists and trigamists also he
   does wrong, for he places on a level with them whoremongers and the
   most licentious persons as soon as they have repented; but perhaps
   those who have been married twice or thrice ought not to complain, for
   the same whoremonger if penitent is made equal in the kingdom of heaven
   even to virgins. I will therefore explain more clearly and in proper
   sequence the arguments he employs and the illustrations he adduces
   respecting marriage, and will treat them in the order in which he
   states them. And I beg the reader not to be disturbed if he is
   compelled to read Jovinian's nauseating trash. He will all the more
   gladly drink Christ's antidote after the devil's poisonous concoction.
   Listen with patience, ye virgins; listen, I pray you, to the voice of
   the most voluptuous of preachers; nay rather close your ears, as you
   would to the Syren's fabled songs, and pass on. For a little while
   endure the wrongs you suffer: think you are crucified with Christ, and
   are listening to the blasphemies of the Pharisees.

   5. First of all, he says, God declares that [4273] "therefore shall a
   man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife:
   and they shall be one flesh." And lest we should say that this is a
   quotation from the Old Testament, he asserts that it has been [4274]
   confirmed by the Lord in the Gospel--"What God hath joined together,
   let not man put asunder": and he immediately adds, [4275] "Be fruitful,
   and multiply, and replenish the earth." He next repeats the names of
   Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalalel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech, Noah,
   and tells us that they all had wives and in accordance with the will of
   God begot sons, as though there could be any table of descent or any
   history of mankind without wives and children. "There," says he, "is
   Enoch, who walked with God and was carried up to heaven. There is Noah,
   the only person who, except his wife, and his sons and their wives, was
   saved at the deluge, although there must have been many persons not of
   marriageable age, and therefore presumably virgins. Again, after the
   deluge, when the human race started as it were anew, men and women were
   paired together and a fresh blessing was pronounced on procreation,
   [4276] "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth." Moreover,
   free permission was given to eat flesh, [4277] "Every moving thing that
   liveth shall be food for you; as the green herb have I given you all."
   He then flies off to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of whom the first had
   three wives, the second one, the third four, Leah, Rachel, Billah, and
   Zilpah, and he declares that Abraham by his faith merited the blessing
   which he received in begetting his son. Sarah, typifying the Church,
   when it had ceased to be with her after the manner of women, exchanged
   the curse of barrenness for the blessing of child-bearing. We are
   informed that Rebekah went like a prophet to inquire of the Lord, and
   was told, [4278] "Two nations and two peoples are in thy womb," that
   Jacob served for his wife, and that when Rachel, thinking it was in the
   power of her husband to give her children, said, [4279] "Give me
   children, or else I die," he replied, [4280] "Am I in God's stead, who
   hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?" so well aware was he
   that the fruit of marriage cometh from the Lord and not from the
   husband. We next learn that Joseph, a holy man of spotless chastity,
   and all the patriarchs, had wives, and that God blessed them all alike
   through the lips of Moses. Judah also and Thamar are brought upon the
   scene, and he censures Onan, slain by the Lord, because he, grudging to
   raise up seed to his brother, marred the marriage rite. He refers to
   Moses and the leprosy of Miriam, who, because she chided her brother on
   account of his wife, was stricken by the avenging hand of God. He
   praises Samson, I may even say extravagantly panegyrizes the uxorious
   Nazarite. Deborah also and Barak are mentioned, because, although they
   had not the benefit of virginity, they were victorious over the iron
   chariots of Sisera and Jabin. He brings forward Jael, the wife of Heber
   the Kenite, and extols her for arming herself with the [4281] stake. He
   says there was no difference between Jephthah and his virgin daughter,
   who was sacrificed to the Lord: nay, of the two, he prefers the faith
   of the father to that of the daughter who met death with grief and
   tears. He then comes to Samuel, another Nazarite of the Lord, who from
   infancy was brought up in the tabernacle and was clad in a linen ephod,
   or, as the words are rendered, in linen vestments: he, too, we are
   told, begot sons without a stain upon his priestly purity. He places
   Boaz and his wife Ruth side by side in his repository, and traces the
   descent of Jesse and David from them. He then points out how David
   himself, for the price of two hundred foreskins and at the peril of his
   life, was bedded with the king's daughter. What shall I say of Solomon,
   whom he includes in the list of husbands, and represents as a type of
   the Saviour, maintaining that of him it was written, [4282] "Give the
   king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the king's son"?
   And [4283] "To him shall be given of the gold of Sheba, and men shall
   pray for him continually." Then all at once he makes a jump to Elijah
   and Elisha, and tells us as a great secret that the spirit of Elijah
   rested on Elisha. Why he mentioned this he does not say. It can hardly
   be that he thinks Elijah and Elisha, like the rest, were married men.
   The next step is to Hezekiah, upon whose praises he dwells, and yet (I
   wonder why) forgets to mention that he said, [4284] "Henceforth I will
   beget children." He relates that Josiah, a righteous man, in whose time
   the book of Deuteronomy was found in the temple, was instructed by
   Huldah, wife of Shallum. Daniel also and the three youths are classed
   by him with the married. Suddenly he betakes himself to the Gospel, and
   adduces Zachariah and Elizabeth, Peter and his father-in-law, and the
   rest of the Apostles. His inference is thus expressed: "If they idly
   urge in defence of themselves the plea that the world in its early
   stage needed to be replenished, let them listen to the words of Paul,
   [4285] I desire therefore that the younger widows marry, bear
   children.' And [4286] Marriage is honourable and the bed undefiled.'
   And [4287] A wife is bound for so long time as her husband liveth; but
   if the husband be dead, she is free to be married to whom she will;
   only in the Lord.' And [4288] Adam was not beguiled, but the woman
   being beguiled hath fallen into transgression: but she shall be saved
   through the child-bearing, if they continue in faith and love and
   sanctification with sobriety.' Surely we shall hear no more of the
   famous Apostolic utterance, [4289] And they who have wives as though
   they had them not.' It can hardly be that you will say the reason why
   he wished them to be married was that some widows had already turned
   back after Satan: as though virgins never fell and their fall was not
   more ruinous. All this makes it clear that in forbidding to marry, and
   to eat food which God created for use, you have consciences seared as
   with a hot iron, and are followers of the Manichæans." Then comes much
   more which it would be unprofitable to discuss. At last he dashes into
   rhetoric and apostrophizes virginity thus: "I do you no wrong, Virgin:
   you have chosen a life of chastity on account of the present distress:
   you determined on the course in order to be holy in body and spirit: be
   not proud: you and your married sisters are members of the same
   Church."

   6. I have perhaps explained his position at too great a length, and
   become tedious to my reader; but I thought it best to draw up in full
   array against myself all his efforts, and to muster all the forces of
   the enemy with their squadrons and generals, lest after an early
   victory there should spring up a series of other engagements. I will
   not therefore do battle with single foes, nor will I be satisfied with
   skirmishes in which I meet small detachments of my opponents. The
   battle must be fought with the whole army of the enemy, and the
   disorderly rabble, fighting more like brigands than soldiers, must be
   repulsed by the skill and method of regular warfare. In the front rank
   I will set the Apostle Paul, and, since he is the bravest of generals,
   will arm him with his own weapons, that is to say, his own statements.
   For the Corinthians asked many questions about this matter, and the
   doctor of the Gentiles and master of the Church gave full replies. What
   he decreed we may regard as the law of Christ speaking in him. At the
   same time, when we begin to refute the several arguments, I trust the
   reader will give me his attention even before the Apostle speaks, and
   will not, in his eagerness to discuss the most weighty points, neglect
   the premises, and rush at once to the conclusion.

   7. Among other things the Corinthians asked in their letter whether
   after embracing the faith of Christ they ought to be unmarried, and for
   the sake of continence put away their wives, and whether believing
   virgins were at liberty to marry. And again, supposing that one of two
   Gentiles believed on Christ, whether the one that believed should leave
   the one that believed not? And in case it were allowable to take wives,
   would the Apostle direct that only Christian wives, or Gentiles also,
   should be taken? Let us then consider Paul's replies to these
   inquiries. [4290] "Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote: It is
   good for a man not to touch a woman. But, because of fornications, let
   each man have his own wife, and let each woman have her own husband.
   Let the husband render unto the wife her due: and likewise also the
   wife unto the husband. The wife hath not power over her own body, but
   the husband: And likewise also the husband hath not power over his own
   body, but the wife. Defraud ye not one the other, except it be by
   consent for a season, that ye may give yourselves unto prayer, and may
   be together again, that Satan tempt you not because of your
   incontinency. But this I say by way of permission not of commandment.
   Yet I would that all men were even as I myself. Howbeit each man hath
   his own gift from God, one after this manner, and another after that.
   But I say to the unmarried and to widows, it is good for them if they
   abide even as I. But if they have not continency, let them marry: for
   it is better to marry than to burn." Let us turn back to the chief
   point of the evidence: "It is good," he says, "for a man not to touch a
   woman." If it is good not to touch a woman, it is bad to touch one: for
   there is no opposite to goodness but badness. But if it be bad and the
   evil is pardoned, the reason for the concession is to prevent worse
   evil. But surely a thing which is only allowed because there may be
   something worse has only a slight degree of goodness. He would never
   have added "let each man have his own wife," unless he had previously
   used the words "but, because of fornications." Do away with
   fornication, and he will not say "let each man have his own wife." Just
   as though one were to lay it down: "It is good to feed on wheaten
   bread, and to eat the finest wheat flour," and yet to prevent a person
   pressed by hunger from devouring cow-dung, I may allow him to eat
   barley. Does it follow that the wheat will not have its peculiar
   purity, because such an one prefers barley to excrement? That is
   naturally good which does not admit of comparison with what is bad, and
   is not eclipsed because something else is preferred. At the same time
   we must notice the Apostle's prudence. He did not say, it is good not
   to have a wife: but, it is good not to touch a woman: as though there
   were danger even in the touch: as though he who touched her, would not
   escape from her who "hunteth for the precious life," who causeth the
   young man's understanding to fly away. [4291] "Can a man take fire in
   his bosom, and his clothes not be burned? Or can one walk upon hot
   coals, and his feet not be scorched?" As then he who touches fire is
   instantly burned, so by the mere touch the peculiar nature of man and
   woman is perceived, and the difference of sex is understood. Heathen
   fables relate how [4292] Mithras and [4293] Ericthonius were begotten
   of the soil, in stone or earth, by raging lust. Hence it was that our
   Joseph, because the Egyptian woman wished to touch him, fled from her
   hands, and, as if he had been bitten by a mad dog and feared the
   spreading poison, threw away the cloak which she had touched. "But,
   because of fornications let each man have his own wife, and let each
   woman have her own husband." He did not say, because of fornication let
   each man marry a wife: otherwise by this excuse he would have thrown
   the reins to lust, and whenever a man's wife died, he would have to
   marry another to prevent fornication, but "have his own wife." Let him
   he says have and use his own wife, whom he had before he became a
   believer, and whom it would have been good not to touch, and, when once
   he became a follower of Christ, to know only as a sister, not as a wife
   unless fornication should make it excusable to touch her. "The wife
   hath not power over her own body, but the husband: and likewise also
   the husband hath not power over his own body, but the wife." The whole
   question here concerns those who are married men. Is it lawful for them
   to do what our Lord forbade in the Gospel, and to put away their wives?
   Whence it is that the Apostle says, "It is good for a man not to touch
   a woman." But inasmuch as he who is once married has no power to
   abstain except by mutual consent, and may not reject an unoffending
   partner, let the husband render unto the wife her due. He bound himself
   voluntarily that he might be under compulsion to render it. "Defraud ye
   not one the other, except it be by consent for a season, that ye may
   give yourselves unto prayer." What, I pray you, is the quality of that
   good thing which hinders prayer? which does not allow the body of
   Christ to be received? So long as I do the husband's part, I fail in
   continency. The same Apostle in another place commands us to pray
   always. If we are to pray always, it follows that we must never be in
   the bondage of wedlock, for as often as I render my wife her due, I
   cannot pray. The Apostle Peter had experience of the bonds of marriage.
   See how he fashions the Church, and what lesson he teaches Christians:
   [4294] "Ye husbands in like manner dwell with your wives according to
   knowledge, giving honour unto the woman, as unto the weaker vessel, as
   being also joint-heirs of the grace of life; to the end that your
   prayers be not hindered." Observe that, as S. Paul before, because in
   both cases the spirit is the same, so S. Peter now, says that prayers
   are hindered by the performance of marriage duty. When he says
   "likewise," he challenges the husbands to imitate their wives, because
   he has already given them commandment: [4295] "beholding your chaste
   conversation coupled with fear. Whose adorning let it not be the
   outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing jewels of gold,
   or of putting on apparel: but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in
   the incorruptible apparel of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
   sight of God of great price." You see what kind of wedlock he enjoins.
   Husbands and wives are to dwell together according to knowledge, so
   that they may know what God wishes and desires, and give honour to the
   weak vessel, woman. If we abstain from intercourse, we give honour to
   our wives: if we do not abstain, it is clear that insult is the
   opposite of honour. He also tells the wives to let their husbands "see
   their chaste behaviour, and the hidden man of the heart, in the
   incorruptible apparel of a meek and quiet spirit." Words truly worthy
   of an apostle, and of Christ's rock! He lays down the law for husbands
   and wives, condemns outward ornament, while he praises continence,
   which is the ornament of the inner man, as seen in the incorruptible
   apparel of a meek and quiet spirit. In effect he says this: Since your
   outer man is corrupt, and you have ceased to possess the blessing of
   incorruption characteristic of virgins, at least imitate the
   incorruption of the spirit by subsequent abstinence, and what you
   cannot show in the body exhibit in the mind. For these are the riches,
   and these the ornaments of your union, which Christ seeks.

   8. The words which follow, "that ye may give yourselves unto prayer,
   and may be together again," might lead one to suppose that the Apostle
   was expressing a wish and not making a concession because of the danger
   of a greater fall. He therefore at once adds, "lest Satan tempt you for
   your incontinency." It is a fine permission which is conveyed in the
   words "be together again." What it was that he blushed to call by its
   own name, and thought only better than a temptation of Satan and the
   effect of incontinence, we take trouble to discuss as if it were
   obscure, although he has explained his meaning by saying, "this I say
   by way of permission, not by way of command." And do we still hesitate
   to speak of marriage as a concession to weakness, not a thing
   commanded, as though second and third marriages were not allowed on the
   same ground, as though the doors of the Church were not opened by
   repentance even to fornicators, and what is more, to the incestuous?
   Take the case of the man who outraged his step-mother. Does not the
   Apostle, after delivering him, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
   to Satan for the destruction of the flesh that his spirit might be
   saved, in the second Epistle take the offender back and strive to
   prevent a brother from being swallowed up by overmuch grief. The
   Apostle's wish is one thing, his pardon another. If a wish be
   expressed, it confers a right; if a thing is only called pardonable, we
   are wrong in using it. If you wish to know the Apostle's real mind, you
   must take in what follows: "but I would that all men were as I am."
   Happy is the man who is like Paul! Fortunate is he who attends to the
   Apostle's command, not to his concession. This, says he, I wish, this I
   desire that ye be imitators of me, as I also am of Christ, who was a
   Virgin born of a Virgin, uncorrupt of her who was uncorrupt. We,
   because we are men, cannot imitate our Lord's nativity; but we may at
   least imitate His life. The former was the blessed prerogative of
   divinity, the latter belongs to our human condition and is part of
   human effort. I would that all men were like me, that while they are
   like me, they may also become like Christ, to whom I am like. For
   [4296] "he that believeth in Christ ought himself also to walk even as
   He walked." [4297] "Howbeit each man hath his own gift from God, one
   after this manner, and another after that." What I wish, he says, is
   clear. But since in the Church there is a diversity of gifts, I
   acquiesce in marriage, lest I should seem to condemn nature. At the
   same time consider, that the gift of virginity is one, that of
   marriage, another. For were the reward the same for the married and for
   virgins, he would never after enjoining continence have said: [4298]
   "Each man hath his own gift from God, one after this manner, and
   another after that." Where there is a distinction in one particular,
   there is a diversity also in other points. I grant that even marriage
   is a gift of God, but between gift and gift there is great diversity.
   In fact the Apostle himself speaking of the same person who had
   repented of his incestuous conduct, says: [4299] "so that contrariwise
   ye should rather forgive him and comfort him, and to whom ye forgive
   anything, I forgive also." And that we might not think a man's gift
   contemptible, he added, [4300] "for what I also have forgiven, if I
   have forgiven anything, for your sakes have I forgiven it, in the
   presence of Christ." There is diversity in the gifts of Christ. Hence
   it is that by way of type Joseph has a coat of many colours. And in the
   forty-fifth psalm we read, [4301] "at thy right hand doth stand the
   queen in a vesture of gold wrought about with divers colours." And the
   Apostle Peter says, [4302] "as heirs together of the manifold grace of
   God," where the more expressive Greek word poikiles, i.e., varied, is
   used.

   9. Then come the words [4303] "But I say to the unmarried and to
   widows, it is good for them if they abide even as I. But if they have
   not continency, let them marry: for it is better to marry than to
   burn." Having conceded to married persons the enjoyment of wedlock and
   pointed out his own wishes, he passes on to the unmarried and to
   widows, sets before them his own practice for imitation, and calls them
   happy if they so abide. "But if they have not continency, let them
   marry," just as he said before "But because of fornications," and "Lest
   Satan tempt you, because of your incontinency." And he gives a reason
   for saying "If they have not continency, let them marry," viz. "It is
   better to marry than to burn." The reason why it is better to marry is
   that it is worse to burn. Let burning lust be absent, and he will not
   say it is better to marry. The word better always implies a comparison
   with something worse, not a thing absolutely good and incapable of
   comparison. It is as though he said, it is better to have one eye than
   neither, it is better to stand on one foot and to support the rest of
   the body with a stick, than to crawl with broken legs. What do you say,
   Apostle? I do not believe you when you say "Though I be rude in speech,
   yet am I not in knowledge." As humility is the source of the sayings
   "For I am not worthy to be called an Apostle," and "To me who am the
   least of the Apostles," and "As to one born out of due time," so here
   also we have an utterance of humility. You know the meaning of
   language, or you would not quote [4304] Epimenides, [4305] Menander,
   and [4306] Aratus. When you are discussing continence and virginity you
   say, "It is good for a man not to touch a woman." And, "It is good for
   them if they abide even as I." And, "I think that this is good by
   reason of the present distress." And, "That it is good for a man so to
   be." When you come to marriage, you do not say it is good to marry,
   because you cannot then add "than to burn;" but you say, "It is better
   to marry than to burn." If marriage in itself be good, do not compare
   it with fire, but simply say "It is good to marry." I suspect the
   goodness of that thing which is forced into the position of being only
   the lesser of two evils. What I want is not a smaller evil, but a thing
   absolutely good.

   10. So far the first section has been explained. Let us now come to
   those which follow. [4307] "But unto the married I give charge, yea not
   I, but the Lord. That the wife depart not from her husband (but and if
   she depart, let her remain unmarried, or else be reconciled to her
   husband): and that the husband leave not his wife. But to the rest say
   I, not the Lord: If any brother hath an unbelieving wife, and she is
   content to dwell with him, let him not leave her," and so on to the
   words "As God hath called each, so let him walk. And so ordain I in all
   the churches." This passage has no bearing on our present controversy.
   For he ordains, according to the mind of the Lord, that excepting the
   cause of fornication, a wife must not be put away, and that a wife who
   has been put away, may not, so long as her husband lives, be married to
   another, or at all events that her duty is to be reconciled to her
   husband. But in the case of those who are already married at the time
   of conversion, that is to say, supposing one of the two were a
   believer, he enjoins that the believer shall not put away the
   unbeliever. And after stating his reason, viz., that the unbeliever who
   is unwilling to leave the believer becomes thereby a candidate for the
   faith, he commands, on the other hand, that if the unbeliever reject
   the faithful one on account of the faith of Christ, the believer ought
   to depart, lest husband or wife be preferred to Christ, in comparison
   with Whom we must hold even life itself cheap. Yet at the present day
   many women despising the Apostle's command, are joined to heathen
   husbands, and prostitute the temples of Christ to idols. They do not
   understand that they are part of His body though indeed they are His
   ribs. The Apostle is lenient to the union of unbelievers, who having
   (believing) husbands, afterwards come to believe in Christ. He does not
   extend his indulgence to those women who, although Christians, have
   been married to heathen husbands. To these he elsewhere says, [4308]
   "Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers: for what fellowship have
   righteousness and iniquity? or what communion hath light with darkness?
   And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what portion hath a
   believer with an unbeliever? And what agreement hath a temple of God
   with idols? For we are a temple of the living God." Although I know
   that crowds of matrons will be furious against me: although I know that
   just as they have shamelessly despised the Lord, so they will rave at
   me who am but a flea and the least of Christians: yet I will speak out
   what I think. I will say what the Apostle has taught me, that they are
   not on the side of righteousness, but of iniquity: not of light, but of
   darkness: that they do not belong to Christ, but to Belial: that they
   are not temples of the living God, but shrines and idols of the dead.
   And, if you wish to see more clearly how utterly unlawful it is for a
   Christian woman to marry a Gentile, consider what the same Apostle
   says, [4309] "A wife is bound for so long time as her husband liveth:
   but if the husband be dead, she is free to be married to whom she will;
   only in the Lord," that is, to a Christian. He who allows second and
   third marriages in the Lord, forbids first marriages with a Gentile.
   Whence Abraham also makes his servant swear upon his thigh, that is, on
   Christ, Who was to spring from his seed, that he would not bring an
   alien-born as a wife for his son Isaac. And Ezra checked an offence of
   this kind against God by making his countrymen put away their wives.
   And the prophet Malachi thus speaks, [4310] "Judah hath dealt
   treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in
   Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holiness of the Lord which he
   loveth, and hath married the daughter of a strange god. The Lord will
   cut off the man that doeth this, [4311] him that teacheth and him that
   learneth, out of the tents of Jacob, and him that offers an offering
   unto the Lord of hosts." I have said this that they who compare
   marriage with virginity, may at least know that such marriages as these
   are on a lower level than digamy and trigamy.

   11. In the above discussion the Apostle has taught that the believer
   ought not to depart from the unbeliever, but remain in marriage as the
   faith found them, and that each man whether married or single should
   continue as he was when baptized into Christ; and then he suddenly
   introduces the metaphors of circumcision and uncircumcision, of bond
   and free, and under those metaphors treats of the married and
   unmarried. [4312] "Was any man called being circumcised? let him not
   become uncircumcised. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
   nothing: but the keeping of the commandments of God. Let each man abide
   in that calling wherein he was called. Wast thou called being a
   bondservant? Care not for it: but even if thou canst become free, use
   it rather. For he that was called in the Lord being a bondservant, is
   the Lord's freedman; likewise he that was called, being free, is
   Christ's bondservant. Ye were bought with a price; become not
   bondservants of men. Brethren, let each man, wherein he was called,
   therein abide with God." Some, I suppose, will find fault with the
   Apostle's way of reasoning. I would therefore ask first, What we are to
   infer from his suddenly passing in a discussion concerning husbands and
   wives to a comparison of Jew and Gentile, bond and free, and then
   returning, when this point is settled, to the question about virgins,
   and telling us "Concerning virgins I have no commandment from the
   Lord"; what has a comparison of Jew and Gentile, bond and free, to do
   with wedlock and virginity? In the next place, how are we to understand
   the words "Hath any been called in uncircumcision, let him not be
   circumcised"? [4313] Can a man who has lost his foreskin restore it
   again at his pleasure? Then, in what sense are we to explain "For he
   that was called in the Lord, being a bondservant, is the Lord's
   freedman: likewise he that was called, being free, is Christ's
   bondservant." Fourthly, how is it that he who commanded servants to
   obey their masters according to the flesh, now says, "Become not
   bondservants of men." Lastly, how are we to connect with slavery, or
   with circumcision, his saying "Brethren, let each man, wherein he was
   called, therein abide with God," which even contradicts his previous
   opinion. We heard him say "Become not bondservants of men." How can we
   then possibly abide in that vocation wherein we were called, when many
   at the time they became believers had masters according to the flesh,
   whose bondservants they are now forbidden to be? Moreover, what has the
   argument about our abiding in the vocation wherein we were called, to
   do with circumcision? for in another place the same Apostle cries aloud
   "Behold I Paul tell you that, if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
   you nothing"? We must conclude, therefore, that a higher meaning should
   be given to circumcision and uncircumcision, bond and free, and that
   these words must be taken in close connection with what has gone
   before. "Was anyone called being circumcised? let him not become
   uncircumcised." If, he says, at the time you were called and became a
   believer in Christ, if I say, you were called being circumcised from a
   wife, that is, unmarried, do not marry a wife, that is, do not become
   uncircumcised, lest you lay upon the freedom of circumcision and
   chastity the burden of marriage. Again, if anyone was called in
   uncircumcision, let him not be circumcised. You had a wife, he says,
   when you believed: do not think the faith of Christ a reason for
   disagreement, because God called us in peace. [4314] "Circumcision is
   nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; but the keeping of the
   commandments of God." For neither celibacy nor marriage availeth
   anything without works, since even faith, which is specially
   characteristic of Christians, if it have not works, is said to be dead,
   and vestal virgins and Juno's widows might upon these terms be numbered
   with the saints. "Let each man in the vocation wherein he was called,
   therein abide." Whether he had, or had not, a wife when he believed,
   let him remain in that condition in which he was when called.
   Accordingly he does not so strongly urge virgins to be married, as
   forbid divorce. And as he debars those who have wives from putting them
   away, so he cuts off from virgins the power of being married. "Thou
   wast called being a slave, heed it not; but even if thou canst become
   free, use it rather." Even if you have, he says, a wife, and are bound
   to her, and pay her due, and have not power over your own body; or if,
   to speak more clearly, you are the bondservant of your wife, be not sad
   upon that account, nor sigh for the loss of your virginity. But even if
   you can find some causes of discord, do not, for the sake of thoroughly
   enjoying the liberty of chastity, seek your own welfare by destroying
   another. Keep your wife awhile, and do not go too fast for her lagging
   footsteps: wait till she follows. If you are patient, your spouse will
   become a sister, "For he that was called in the Lord, being a
   bondservant, is the Lord's freedman: likewise, he that was called being
   free, is Christ's bondservant." He gives his reasons for not wishing
   wives to be forsaken. He therefore says, I command that Gentiles who
   believe on Christ do not abandon the married state in which they were
   before embracing the faith: for he who had a wife when he became a
   believer, is not so strictly devoted to the service of God as virgins
   and unmarried persons. But, in a manner, he has more freedom, and the
   reins of his bondage are relaxed; and, while he is the bondservant of a
   wife, he is, so to speak, the freedman of the Lord. Moreover, he who
   when called by the Lord had not a wife and was free from the bondage of
   wedlock, he is truly Christ's bondservant. What happiness to be the
   bondservant, not of a wife but of Christ, to serve not the flesh, but
   the spirit! [4315] "For he who is joined unto the Lord is one spirit."
   There was some fear that by saying "Wast thou called being a
   bondservant? Care not for it: but, even if thou canst become free, use
   it rather," he might seem to have flouted continence, and to have given
   us up to the slavery of marriage. He therefore makes a remark which
   removes all cavil: "Ye were bought with a price, become not servants of
   men." We have been redeemed with the most precious blood of Christ: the
   Lamb was slain for us, and having been sprinkled with hyssop and the
   warm drops of His blood, we have rejected poisonous pleasure. Why do we
   at whose baptism Pharaoh died and all his host was drowned, again turn
   back in our hearts to Egypt, and after the manna, angels' food, sigh
   for the garlic and the onions and the cucumbers, and Pharaoh's meat?

   12. Having discussed marriage and continency he at length comes to
   virginity and says [4316] "Now concerning virgins I have no commandment
   of the Lord: but I give my judgement, as one that hath obtained mercy
   of the Lord to be faithful. I think therefore that this is good by
   reason of the present distress, namely, that it is good for a man to be
   as he is." Here our opponent goes utterly wild with exultation: this is
   his strongest battering-ram with which he shakes the wall of virginity.
   "See," says he, "the Apostle confesses that as regards virgins he has
   no commandment of the Lord, and he who had with authority laid down the
   law respecting husbands and wives, does not dare to command what the
   Lord has not enjoined. And rightly too. For what is enjoined is
   commanded, what is commanded must be done, and that which must be done
   implies punishment if it be not done. For it is useless to order a
   thing to be done and yet leave the individual free to do it or not do
   it. If the Lord had commanded virginity He would have seemed to condemn
   marriage, and to do away with the seed-plot of mankind, of which
   virginity itself is a growth. If He had cut off the root, how was He to
   expect fruit? If the foundations were not first laid, how was He to
   build the edifice, and put on the roof to cover all! Excavators toil
   hard to remove mountains; the bowels of the earth are pierced in the
   search for gold. And, when the tiny particles, first by the blast of
   the furnace, then by the hand of the cunning workman have been
   fashioned into an ornament, men do not call him blessed who has
   separated the gold from the dross, but him who wears the beautiful
   gold. Do not marvel then if, placed as we are, amid temptations of the
   flesh and incentives to vice, the angelic life be not exacted of us,
   but merely recommended. If advice be given, a man is free to proffer
   obedience; if there be a command, he is a servant bound to compliance.
   "I have no commandment," he says, "of the Lord: but I give my
   judgement, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful."
   If you have no commandment of the Lord, how dare you give judgement
   without orders? The Apostle will reply: Do you wish me to give orders
   where the Lord has offered a favour rather than laid down a law? The
   great Creator and Fashioner, knowing the weakness of the vessel which
   he made, left virginity open to those whom He addressed; and shall I,
   the teacher of the Gentiles, who have become all things to all men that
   I might gain all, shall I lay upon the necks of weak believers from the
   very first the burden of perpetual chastity? Let them [4317] begin with
   short periods of release from the marriage bond, and give themselves
   unto prayer, that when they have tasted the sweets of chastity they may
   desire the perpetual possession of that wherewith they were temporarily
   delighted. The Lord, when tempted by the Pharisees, and asked whether
   according to the law of Moses it was permitted to put away a wife,
   forbade the practice altogether. After weighing His words the disciples
   said to Him: [4318] "If the case of the man is so with his wife, it is
   not expedient to marry. But He said unto them, all men cannot receive
   this saying, but they to whom it is given. For there are eunuchs, which
   were so born from their mother's womb: and there are eunuchs, which
   were made eunuchs by men: and there are eunuchs, which made themselves
   eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive
   it, let him receive it." The reason is plain why the Apostle said,
   "concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord." Surely; because
   the Lord had previously said "All men cannot receive the word, but they
   to whom it is given," and "He that is able to receive it, let him
   receive it." [4319] The Master of the Christian race offers the reward,
   invites candidates to the course, holds in His hand the prize of
   virginity, points to the fountain of purity, and cries aloud [4320] "If
   any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink." "He that is able to
   receive it, let him receive it." He does not say, you must drink, you
   must run, willing or unwilling: but whoever is willing and able to run
   and to drink, he shall conquer, he shall be satisfied. And therefore
   Christ loves virgins more than others, because they willingly give what
   was not commanded them. And it indicates greater grace to offer what
   you are not bound to give, than to render what is exacted of you. The
   apostles, contemplating the burden of a wife, exclaimed, "If the case
   of the man is so with his wife, it is not expedient to marry." Our Lord
   thought well of their view. You rightly think, said He, that it is not
   expedient for a man who is hastening to the kingdom of heaven to take a
   wife: but it is a hard matter, and all men do not receive the saying,
   but they to whom it has been given. Some are eunuchs by nature, others
   by the violence of men. Those eunuchs please Me who are such not of
   necessity, but of free choice. Willingly do I take them into my bosom
   who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake, and
   in order to worship Me have renounced the condition of their birth. We
   must now explain the words, "Those who have made themselves eunuchs for
   the kingdom of heaven's sake." If they who have made themselves eunuchs
   have the reward of the kingdom of heaven, it follows that they who have
   not made themselves such cannot be placed with those who have. He who
   is able, he says, to receive it, let him receive it. It is a mark of
   great faith and of great virtue, to be the pure temple of God, to offer
   oneself a whole burnt-offering, and, according to the same apostle, to
   be holy both in body and in spirit. These are the eunuchs, who thinking
   themselves dry trees because of their impotence, hear by the mouth of
   [4321] Isaiah that they have a place prepared in heaven for sons and
   daughters. Their type is [4322] Ebed-melech the eunuch in Jeremiah, and
   the eunuch of Queen Candace in the [4323] Acts of the Apostles, who on
   account of the strength of his faith gained the name of a man. These
   are they to whom Clement, who was the successor of the Apostle Peter,
   and of whom the Apostle Paul makes mention, wrote letters, directing
   almost the whole of his discourse to the subject of virgin purity.
   After them there is a long series of apostolic men, martyrs, and men
   illustrious no less for holiness than for eloquence, with whom we may
   very easily become acquainted through their own writings. [4324] "I
   think, therefore," he says, "that this is good for the present
   distress." What is this distress which, in contempt of the marriage
   tie, longs for the liberty of virginity? [4325] "Woe unto them that are
   with child and to them that give suck in those days." We have not here
   a condemnation of harlots and brothels, of whose damnation there is no
   doubt, but of the swelling womb, and wailing infancy, the fruit as well
   as the work of marriage. "For it is good for a man so to be." If it is
   good for a man so to be, it is bad for a man not so to be. [4326] "Art
   thou bound unto a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a
   wife? Seek not a wife." Each one of us has his appointed bounds; let me
   have what is mine, and keep your own. If thou art bound to a wife, give
   her not a bill of divorce. If I am loosed from a wife, I will not seek
   a wife. As I do not dissolve marriages once contracted: so you should
   not bind what is loosed. And at the same time the meaning of the words
   must be taken into account. He who has a wife is regarded as a debtor,
   and is said to be uncircumcised, to be the servant of his wife, and
   like bad servants to be bound. But he who has no wife, in the first
   place owes no man anything, then is circumcised, thirdly is free,
   lastly, is loosed.

   13. Let us run through the remaining points, for our author is so
   voluminous that we cannot linger over every detail. "But and if thou
   marry, thou hast not sinned." It is one thing not to sin, another to do
   good. "And if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned." Not that virgin who
   has once for all dedicated herself to the service of God: for, should
   one of these marry, she will have damnation, because she has made of no
   account her first faith. But, if our adversary objects that this saying
   relates to widows, we reply that it applies with still greater force to
   virgins, since marriage is forbidden even to widows whose previous
   marriage had been lawful. For virgins who marry after consecration are
   rather incestuous than adulterous. And, for fear he should by saying,
   "And if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned," again stimulate the
   unmarried to be married, he immediately checks himself, and by
   introducing another consideration, invalidates his previous concession.
   "Yet," says he, "such shall have tribulation in the flesh." Who are
   they who shall have tribulation in the flesh? They to whom he had
   before indulgently said "But and if thou marry, thou hast not sinned;
   and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned. Yet such shall have
   tribulation in the flesh." We in our inexperience thought that marriage
   had at least the joys of the flesh. But if they who are married have
   tribulation even in the flesh, which is imagined to be the sole source
   of their pleasure, what else is there to marry for, when in the spirit,
   and in the mind, and in the flesh itself there is tribulation. "But I
   would spare you." Thus, he says, I allege tribulation as a motive, as
   though there were not greater obligations to refrain. "But this I say,
   brethren, the time is shortened, that henceforth both those that have
   wives may be as though they had none." I am by no means now discussing
   virgins, of whose happiness no one entertains a doubt. I am coming to
   the married. The time is short, the Lord is at hand. Even though we
   lived nine hundred years, as did men of old, yet we ought to think that
   short which must one day have an end, and cease to be. But, as things
   are, and it is not so much the joy as the tribulation of marriage that
   is short, why do we take wives whom we shall soon be compelled to lose?
   [4327] "And those that weep, and those that rejoice, and those that
   buy, and those that use the world, as though they wept not, as though
   they rejoiced not, as though they bought not, as though they did not
   use the world: for the fashion of this world passeth away." If the
   world, which comprehends all things, passes away, yea if the fashion
   and intercourse of the world vanishes like the clouds, amongst the
   other works of the world, marriage too will vanish away. For after the
   resurrection there will be no wedlock. But if death be the end of
   marriage, why do we not voluntarily embrace the inevitable? And why do
   we not, encouraged by the hope of the reward, offer to God that which
   must be wrung from us against our will. "He that is unmarried is
   careful for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he
   that is married is careful for the things of the world, how he may
   please his wife, and is [4328] divided." Let us look at the difference
   between the cares of the virgin, and those of the married man. The
   virgin longs to please the Lord, the husband to please his wife, and
   that he may please her he is careful for the things of the world, which
   will of course pass away with the world. "And he is divided," that is
   to say, is distracted with manifold cares and miseries. This is not the
   place to describe the difficulties of marriage, and to revel in
   rhetorical commonplaces. I think I delivered myself fully as regards
   this point in my argument against [4329] Helvidius, and in the book
   which I addressed to [4330] Eustochium. At all events [4331]
   Tertullian, while still a young man, gave himself full play with this
   subject. And my teacher, [4332] Gregory of Nazianzus, discussed
   virginity and marriage in some Greek verses. I now briefly beg my
   reader to note that in the Latin manuscripts we have the reading "there
   is a difference also between the virgin and the wife." The words, it is
   true, have a meaning of their own, and have by me, as well as by
   others, been so explained as showing the bearing of the passage. Yet
   they lack apostolic authority, since the Apostle's words are as we have
   translated them--"He is careful for the things of the world, how he may
   please his wife, [4333] and he is divided." Having laid down this, he
   passes to the virgins and the continent, and says "The woman that is
   unmarried and a virgin thinks of the things of the Lord, that she may
   be holy in body and in spirit." Not every unmarried woman is also a
   virgin. But every virgin is of course unmarried. It may be, that regard
   for elegance of expression led him to repeat the same idea by means of
   another word and speak of "a woman unmarried and a virgin"; or at least
   he may have wished to give to "unmarried" the definite meaning of
   "virgin," so that we might not suppose him to include harlots, united
   to no one by the fixed bonds of wedlock, among the "unmarried." Of
   what, then, does she that is unmarried and a virgin think? "The things
   of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit."
   Supposing there were nothing else, and that no greater reward followed
   virginity, this would be motive enough for her choice, to think of the
   things of the Lord. But he immediately points out the contents of her
   thought--that she may be holy both in body and spirit. For there are
   virgins in the flesh, not in the spirit, whose body is intact, their
   soul corrupt. But that virgin is a sacrifice to Christ, whose mind has
   not been defiled by thought, nor her flesh by lust. On the other hand,
   she who is married thinks of the things of the world, how she may
   please her husband. Just as the man who has a wife is anxious for the
   things of the world, how he may please his wife, so the married woman
   thinks of the things of the world, how she may please her husband. But
   we are not of this world, which lieth in wickedness, the fashion of
   which passeth away, and concerning which the Lord said to the Apostles,
   [4334] "If ye were of the world, the world would love its own." And
   lest perchance someone might suppose that he was laying the heavy
   burden of chastity on unwilling shoulders, he at once adds his reasons
   for persuading to it, and says: [4335] "And this I say for your profit;
   not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is seemly, and
   that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction." The Latin words
   do not convey the meaning of the Greek. What words shall we use to
   render Pros to euschemon kai euprosedron to Kuri& 251; aperispastos'
   The difficulty of translation accounts for the fact that the clause is
   completely wanting in Latin manuscripts. Let us, however, use the
   passage as we have translated it. The Apostle does not lay a snare upon
   us, nor does he compel us to be what we do not wish to be; but he gives
   his advice as to what is fair and seemly, he would have us attend upon
   the Lord and ever be anxious about that service, and await the Lord's
   will, so that like active and well-armed soldiers we may obey orders,
   and may do so without distraction, which, according to [4336]
   Ecclesiastes, is given to the men of this world that they may be
   exercised thereby. But if anyone considers that his virgin, that is,
   his flesh, is wanton and boiling with lust, and cannot be bridled, and
   he must do one of two things, either take a wife or fall, let him do
   what he will, he does not sin if he marry. Let him do, he says, what he
   will, not what he ought. He does not sin if he marry a wife; yet, he
   does not well if he marry: [4337] "But he that standeth stedfast in his
   heart, having no necessity, but hath power as touching his own will,
   and hath determined this in his own heart, to keep his own virgin,
   shall do well. So then both he that giveth his own virgin in marriage
   doeth well; and he that giveth her not in marriage shall do better."
   With marked propriety he had previously said "He who marries a wife
   does not sin": here he tells us "He that keepeth his own virgin doeth
   well." But it is one thing not to sin, another to do well. [4338]
   "Depart from evil," he says, "and do good." The former we forsake, the
   latter we follow. In this last lies perfection. But whereas he says
   "and he that giveth his virgin in marriage doeth well," it might be
   supposed that our remark does not hold good; he therefore forthwith
   detracts from this seeming good and puts it in the shade by comparing
   it with another, and saying, "and he that giveth her not in marriage
   shall do better." If he had not intended to draw the inference of doing
   better, he would never have previously referred to doing well. But
   where there is something good and something better, the reward is not
   in both cases the same, and where the reward is not one and the same,
   there of course the gifts are different. The difference, then, between
   marriage and virginity is as great as that between not sinning and
   doing well; nay rather, to speak less harshly, as great as between good
   and better.

   14. He has ended his discussion of wedlock and virginity, and has
   carefully steered between the two precepts without turning to the right
   hand or to the left. He has followed the royal road and fulfilled the
   command [4339] not to be righteous over much. Now again he compares
   monogamy with digamy, and as he had subordinated marriage to virginity,
   so he makes second marriages inferior to first, and says, [4340] "A
   wife is bound for so long time as her husband liveth; but if the
   husband be dead, she is free to be married to whom she will; only in
   the Lord. But she is happier if she abide as she is, after my
   judgement: and I think that I also have the Spirit of God." He allows
   second marriages, but to such persons as wish for them and are not able
   to contain; lest, [4341] having "waxed wanton against Christ," they
   desire to marry, "having condemnation, because they have rejected their
   first faith;" and he makes the concession because many had already
   turned aside after Satan. [4342] "But," says he, "they will be happier
   if they abide as they are," and he immediately adds the weight of
   Apostolic authority, "after my judgement." And that an Apostle's
   authority might not, like that of an ordinary man, be without weight,
   he added, "and I think that I also have the Spirit of God." When he
   incites to continence, it is not by the judgement or spirit of man, but
   by the judgement and Spirit of God; when, however, he grants the
   indulgence of marriage, he does not mention the Spirit of God, but
   weighs his judgement with wisdom, and adapts the severity of the strain
   to the weakness of the individual. In this sense we must take the whole
   of the following passage: [4343] "For the woman that hath a husband is
   bound by law to the husband while he liveth; but if the husband die,
   she is discharged from the law of the husband. So then if, while the
   husband liveth, she be joined to another man, she shall be called an
   adulteress: but if the husband die, she is free from the law, so that
   she is no adulteress, though she be joined to another man." And
   similarly the words to Timothy, [4344] "I desire therefore that the
   younger widows marry, bear children, rule the household, give none
   occasion to the adversary for reviling: for already some are turned
   aside after Satan," and so on. For as on account of the danger of
   fornication he allows virgins to marry, and makes that excusable which
   in itself is not desirable, so to avoid this same fornication, he
   allows second marriages to widows. For it is better to know a single
   husband, though he be a second or third, than to have many paramours:
   that is, it is more tolerable for a woman to prostitute herself to one
   man than to many. At all events this is so if the Samaritan woman in
   John's Gospel who said she had her sixth husband was reproved by the
   Lord because he was not her husband. For where there are more husbands
   than one the proper idea of a husband, who is a single person, is
   destroyed. At the beginning one rib was turned into one wife. "And they
   two," he says, "shall be one flesh": not three, or four; otherwise, how
   can they be any longer two, if they are several. Lamech, a man of blood
   and a murderer, was the first who divided one flesh between two wives.
   Fratricide and digamy were abolished by the same punishment--that of
   the deluge. The one was avenged seven times, the other seventy times
   seven. The guilt is as widely different as are the numbers. What the
   holiness of second marriage is, appears from this--that a person twice
   married [4345] cannot be enrolled in the ranks of the clergy, and so
   the Apostle tells Timothy, [4346] "Let none be enrolled as a widow
   under threescore years old, having been the wife of one man." The whole
   command concerns those widows who are supported on the alms of the
   Church. The age is therefore limited, so that those only may receive
   the food of the poor who can no longer work. And at the same time,
   consider that she who has had two husbands, even though she be a widow,
   decrepit, and in want, is not a worthy recipient of the Church's funds.
   But if she be deprived of the bread of charity, how much more is she
   deprived of that bread which cometh down from heaven, and of which if a
   man eat unworthily, he shall be guilty of outrage offered to the body
   and the blood of Christ?

   15. The passages, however, which I have adduced in support of my
   position and in which it is permitted to widows, if they so desire, to
   marry again, are interpreted by some concerning those widows who had
   lost their husbands and were found in that condition when they became
   Christians. For, supposing a person baptized and her husband dead, it
   would not be consistent if the Apostle were to bid her marry another,
   when he enjoins even those who have wives to be as though they had them
   not. And this is why the number of wives which a man may take is not
   defined, because when Christian baptism has been received, even though
   a third or a fourth wife has been taken, she is reckoned as the first.
   Otherwise, if, after baptism and after the death of a first husband, a
   second is taken why should not a sixth after the death of the second,
   third, fourth, and fifth, and so on? For it is possible, that through
   some strange misfortune, or by the judgement of God cutting short
   repeated marriages, a young woman may have several husbands, while an
   old woman may be left a widow by her first husband in extreme age. The
   first Adam was married once: the second was unmarried. Let the
   supporters of second marriages shew us as their leader a third Adam who
   was twice married. But granted that Paul allowed second marriages: upon
   the same grounds it follows that he allows even third and fourth
   marriages, or a woman may marry as often as her husband dies. The
   Apostle was forced to choose many things which he did not like. He
   circumcised Timothy, and shaved his own head, practised going barefoot,
   let his hair grow long, and cut it at Cenchrea. And he had certainly
   chastised the Galatians, and blamed Peter because for the sake of
   Jewish observances he separated himself from the Gentiles. As then in
   other points connected with the discipline of the Church he was a Jew
   to Jews, a Gentile to Gentiles, and was made all things to all men,
   that he might gain all: so too he allowed second marriages to
   incontinent persons, and did not limit the number of marriages, in
   order that women, although they saw themselves permitted to take a
   second husband, in the same way as a third or a fourth was allowed,
   might blush to take a second, lest they should be compared to those who
   were three or four times married. If more than one husband be allowed,
   it makes no difference whether he be a second or a third, because there
   is no longer a question of single marriage. [4347] "All things are
   lawful, but not all things are expedient." I do not condemn second, nor
   third, nor, pardon the expression, eighth marriages: I will go still
   further and say that I welcome even a penitent whoremonger. Things that
   are equally lawful must be weighed in an even balance.

   16. But he takes us to the Old Testament, and beginning with Adam goes
   on to Zacharias and Elizabeth. He next confronts us with Peter and the
   rest of the Apostles. We are therefore bound to traverse the same
   course of argument and show that chastity was always preferred to the
   condition of marriage. And as regards Adam and Eve we must maintain
   that before the fall they were virgins in Paradise: but after they
   sinned, and were cast out of Paradise, they were immediately married.
   Then we have the passage, [4348] "For this cause shall a man leave his
   father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and the twain shall
   become one flesh," in explanation of which the Apostle straightway
   adds, [4349] "This mystery is great, but I speak in regard of Christ,
   and of the Church." Christ in the flesh is a virgin, in the spirit he
   is once married. For he has one Church, concerning which the same
   Apostle says, [4350] "Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also
   loved the Church." If Christ loves the Church holily, chastely, and
   without spot, let husbands also love their wives in chastity. And let
   everyone know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honour,
   not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles who know not God:
   [4351] "For God called us not for uncleanness, but in sanctification:
   seeing that ye have put off the old man with his doings, and have put
   on the new man, which is being renewed unto knowledge after the image
   of him that created him: where there cannot be male and female, Greek
   and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondman,
   freeman: but Christ is all, and in all." The link of marriage is not
   found in the image of the Creator. When difference of sex is done away,
   and we are putting off the old man, and putting on the new, then we are
   being born again into Christ a virgin, who was both born of a virgin,
   and is born again through [4352] virginity. And whereas he says "Be
   fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth," it was necessary
   first to plant the wood and to let it grow, so that there might be an
   after-growth for cutting down. And at the same time we must bear in
   mind the meaning of the phrase, "replenish the earth." Marriage
   replenishes the earth, virginity fills Paradise. This too we must
   observe, at least if we would faithfully follow the Hebrew, that while
   Scripture on the first, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth days relates
   that, having finished the works of each, "God saw that it was good," on
   the second day it omitted this altogether, leaving us to understand
   that two is not a good number because it destroys unity, and prefigures
   the marriage compact. Hence it was that all the animals which Noah took
   into the ark by pairs were unclean. Odd numbers denote cleanness. And
   yet by the double number is represented another mystery: that not even
   in beasts and unclean birds is second marriage approved. For unclean
   animals went in two and two, and clean ones by sevens, so that Noah
   after the flood might be able to immediately offer to God sacrifices
   from the latter.

   17. But if Enoch was translated, and Noah was preserved at the deluge,
   I do not think that Enoch was translated because he had a wife, but
   because he was [4353] the first to call upon God and to believe in the
   Creator; and the Apostle Paul fully instructs us concerning him in the
   Epistle to the Hebrews. Noah, moreover, who was preserved as a kind of
   second root for the human race, must of course be preserved together
   with his wife and sons, although in this there is a Scripture mystery.
   The ark, [4354] according to the Apostle Peter, was a type of the
   Church, in which eight souls were saved. When Noah entered into it,
   both he and his sons were separated from their wives; but when he
   landed from it, they united in pairs, and what had been separated in
   the ark, that is, in the Church, was joined together in the intercourse
   of the world. And at the same time if the ark had many compartments and
   little chambers, and was made with second and third stories, and was
   filled with different beasts, and was furnished with dwellings, great
   or small, according to the kind of animal, I think all this diversity
   in the compartments was a figure of the manifold character of the
   Church.

   18. He raises the objection that when God gave his second blessing,
   permission was granted to eat flesh, which had not in the first
   benediction been allowed. He should know that just as divorce according
   to the Saviour's word was not permitted from the beginning, but on
   account of the hardness of our heart was a concession of Moses to the
   human race, so too the eating of flesh was unknown until the deluge.
   But after the deluge, like the quails given in the desert to the
   murmuring people, the poison of flesh-meat was offered to our teeth.
   The Apostle writing to the Ephesians [4355] teaches that God had
   purposed in the fulness of time to sum up and renew in Christ Jesus all
   things which are in heaven and in earth. Whence also the Saviour
   himself in the Revelation of John says, [4356] "I am Alpha and Omega,
   the beginning and the ending." At the beginning of the human race we
   neither ate flesh, nor gave bills of divorce, nor suffered circumcision
   for a sign. Thus we reached the deluge. But after the deluge, together
   with the giving of the law which no one could fulfil, flesh was given
   for food, and divorce was allowed to hard-hearted men, and the knife of
   circumcision was applied, as though the hand of God had fashioned us
   with something superfluous. But once Christ has come in the end of
   time, and Omega passed into Alpha and turned the end into the
   beginning, we are no longer allowed divorce, nor are we circumcised,
   nor do we eat flesh, for the Apostle says, [4357] "It is good not to
   eat flesh, nor to drink wine." For wine as well as flesh was
   consecrated after the deluge.

   19. What shall I say of Abraham who had three wives, as Jovinianus
   says, and received circumcision as a sign of his faith? If we follow
   him in the number of his wives, let us also follow him in circumcision.
   We must not partly follow, partly reject him. Isaac, moreover, the
   husband of one wife, Rebecca, prefigures the Church of Christ, and
   reproves the wantonness of second marriage. And if Jacob had two pairs
   of wives and concubines, and our opponent will not admit that
   blear-eyed Leah, ugly and prolific, was a type of the synagogue, but
   that Rachel, beautiful and long barren, indicated the mystery of the
   Church, let me remind him that when Jacob did this thing he was among
   the Assyrians, and in Mesopotamia in bondage to a hard master. But when
   he wished to enter the holy land, he raised on Mount Galeed [4358] the
   heap of witness, in token that the lord of Mesopotamia had failed to
   find anything among his baggage, and there swore that he would never
   return to the place of his bondage; and when, [4359] after wrestling
   with the angel at the brook Jabbok, he began to limp, because the great
   muscle of his thigh was withered, he at once gained the name of Israel.
   [4360] Then the wife whom he once loved, and for whom he had served,
   was slain by the son of sorrow near Bethlehem which was destined to be
   the birthplace of our Lord, the herald of virginity: and the intimacies
   of Mesopotamia died in the land of the Gospel.

   20. But I wonder why he set [4361] Judah and Tamar before us for an
   example, unless perchance even harlots give him pleasure; or [4362]
   Onan who was slain because he grudged his brother seed. Does he imagine
   that we approve of any sexual intercourse except for the procreation of
   children? As regards Moses, it is clear that he would have been in
   peril at the inn, if [4363] Sephora which is by interpretation a bird,
   had not circumcised her son, and cut off the foreskin of marriage with
   the knife which prefigured the Gospel. This is that Moses who when he
   saw a great vision and heard an angel, or the Lord speaking in the
   bush, [4364] could not by any means approach to him without first
   loosing the latchet of his shoe, that is, putting off the bonds of
   marriage. And we need not be surprised at this in the case of one who
   was a prophet, lawgiver, and the friend of God, seeing that all the
   people when about to draw nigh to Mount Sinai, and to hear the voice
   speaking to them, were commanded to sanctify themselves in three days,
   and keep themselves from their wives. I am out of order in violating
   historical sequence, but I may point out that the same thing was said
   by [4365] Ahimelech the priest to David when he fled to Nob: "If only
   the young men have kept themselves from women." And David answered, "of
   a truth about these three days." For the shew-bread, like the body of
   Christ, might not be eaten by those who rose from the marriage bed. And
   in passing we ought to consider the words "if only the young men have
   kept themselves from women." The truth is that, in view of the purity
   of the body of Christ, all sexual intercourse is unclean. In the law
   also it is enjoined that the [4366] high priest must not marry any but
   a virgin, nor must he take to wife a widow. If a virgin and a widow are
   on the same level, how is it that one is taken, the other rejected?
   [4367] And the widow of a priest is bidden abide in the house of her
   father, and not to contract a second marriage. [4368] If the sister of
   a priest dies in virginity, just as the priest is commanded to go to
   the funeral of his father and mother, so must he go to hers. But if she
   be married, she is despised as though she belonged not to him. He who
   has [4369] married a wife, and he who has planted a vineyard, an image
   of the propagation of children, is forbidden to go to the battle. For
   he who is the slave of his wife cannot be the Lord's soldier. And the
   laver in the tabernacle was cast from the mirrors of the women who
   [4370] fasted, signifying the bodies of pure virgins: And within,
   [4371] in the sanctuary, both cherubim, and mercy-seat, and the ark of
   the covenant, and the table of shew-bread, and the candle-stick, and
   the censer, were made of the purest gold. For silver might not be
   brought into the holy of holies.

   21. I must not linger over Moses when my purpose is at full speed to
   lightly touch on each topic and to sketch the outline of a proper
   knowledge of my subject. I will pass to Joshua the son of Nun, who was
   previously called Ause, or better, as in the Hebrew, Osee, that is,
   Saviour. For he, [4372] according to the epistle of Jude, saved the
   people of Israel and led them forth out of Egypt, and brought them into
   the land of promise. As soon as this Joshua [4373] reached the Jordan,
   the waters of marriage, which had ever flowed in the land, dried up and
   stood in one heap; and the whole people, barefooted and on dry ground,
   crossed over, and came to Gilgal, and there was a second time
   circumcised. If we take this literally, it cannot possibly stand. For
   if we had two foreskins, or if another could grow after the first was
   cut off, there would be room for speaking of a second circumcision. But
   the meaning is that Joshua circumcised the people who had crossed the
   desert, with the Gospel knife, and he circumcised them with a stone
   knife, that what in the case of Moses' son was prefigured in a few
   might under Joshua be fulfilled in all. Moreover, the very foreskins
   were heaped together and buried, and covered with earth, and the fact
   that the reproach of Egypt was taken away, and the name of the place,
   Gilgal, which is by interpretation [4374] revelation, show that while
   the people wandered in the desert uncircumcised their eyes were
   blinded. Let us see what follows. After this Gospel circumcision and
   the consecration of twelve stones at the place of revelation, the
   Passover was immediately celebrated, a lamb was slain for them, and
   they ate the food of the Holy Land. Joshua went forth, and was met by
   the Prince of the host, sword in hand, that is either to shew that he
   was ready to fight for the circumcised people, or to sever the tie of
   marriage. And in the same way that Moses was commanded, so was he:
   [4375] "loose thy shoe, for the place whereon thou standest is holy
   ground." For if the armed host of the Lord was represented by the
   trumpets of the priests, we may see in Jericho a type of the overthrow
   of the world by the preaching of the Gospel. And to pass over endless
   details (for it is not my purpose now to unfold all the mysteries of
   the Old Testament), [4376] five kings who previously reigned in the
   land of promise, and opposed the Gospel army, were overcome in battle
   with Joshua. I think it is clearly to be understood that before the
   Lord led his people from Egypt and circumcised them, sight, smell,
   taste, hearing, and touch had the dominion, and that to these, as to
   five princes, everything was subject. And when they [4377] took refuge
   in the cave of the body and in a place of darkness, Jesus entered the
   body itself and slew them, that the source of their power might be the
   instrument of their death.

   22. But it is now time for us to raise the standard of Joshua's
   chastity. It is written that Moses had a wife. Now Moses is interpreted
   both by our Lord and by the Apostle to mean the law: [4378] "They have
   Moses and the prophets." And [4379] "Death reigned from Adam until
   Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the likeness of Adam's
   transgression." And no one doubts that in both passages Moses signifies
   the law. We read that Moses, that is the law, had a wife: shew me then
   in the same way that Joshua the son of Nun had either wife or children,
   and if you can do so, I will confess that I am beaten. He certainly
   received the fairest spot in the division of the land of Judah, and
   died, not in the twenties, which are ever unlucky in Scripture--by them
   are reckoned the years of [4380] Jacob's service, [4381] the price of
   Joseph, and [4382] sundry presents which Esau who was fond of them
   received--but in the [4383] tens, whose praises we have often sung; and
   he was buried in [4384] Thamnath Sare, that is, most perfect
   sovereignty, or among those of a new covering, to signify the crowds of
   virgins, covered by the Saviour's aid on Mount Ephraim, that is, the
   fruitful mountain; on the north of the Mountain of Gaash, which is,
   being interpreted, disturbance: for [4385] "Mount Sion is on the sides
   of the north, the city of the Great King," is ever exposed to hatred,
   and in every trial says [4386] "But my feet had well nigh slipped." The
   book which bears the name of Joshua ends with his burial. Again in the
   book of Judges we read of him as though he had risen and come to life
   again, and by way of summary his works are extolled. We read too [4387]
   "So Joshua sent the people away, every man unto his inheritance, that
   they might possess the land." And "Israel served the Lord all the days
   of Joshua," and so on. There immediately follows: "And Joshua the son
   of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died, being an hundred and ten years
   old." Moses, moreover, only saw the land of promise; he could not
   enter: and [4388] "he died in the land of Moab, and the Lord buried him
   in the valley in the land of Moab over against Beth-peor: but no man
   knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day." Let us compare the burial of
   the two: Moses died in the land of Moab, Joshua in the land of Judæa.
   The former was buried in a valley over against the house of Phogor,
   which is, being interpreted, reproach (for the Hebrew Phogor
   corresponds to Priapus [4389] ); the latter in Mount Ephraim on the
   north of Mount Gaash. And in the simple expressions of the sacred
   Scriptures there is always a more subtle meaning. The Jews gloried in
   children and child-bearing; and the barren woman, who had not offspring
   in Israel, was accursed; but blessed was he whose seed was in Sion, and
   his family in Jerusalem; and part of the highest blessing was, [4390]
   "Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine, in the innermost parts of thy
   house, thy children like olive plants, round about thy table."
   Therefore his grave is described as placed in a valley over against the
   house of an idol which was in a special sense consecrated to lust. But
   we who fight under Joshua our leader, even to the present day know not
   where Moses was buried. For we despise Phogor, and all his shame,
   knowing that they who are in the flesh cannot please God. And the Lord
   before the flood had said [4391] "My spirit shall not abide in man for
   ever, for that he also is flesh." Wherefore, when Moses died, the
   people of Israel mourned for him; but Joshua like one on his way to
   victory was unmourned. For marriage ends at death; virginity thereafter
   begins to wear the crown.

   23. Next he brings forward Samson, and does not consider that the
   Lord's Nazarite was once shaven bald by a woman. And although Samson
   continues to be a type of the Saviour because he loved a harlot from
   among the Gentiles, which harlot corresponds to the Church, and because
   he slew more enemies in his death than he did in his life, yet he does
   not set an example of conjugal chastity. And he surely reminds us
   [4392] of Jacob's prophecy--he was shaken by his runaway steed, bitten
   by an adder and fell backwards. But why he enumerated Deborah, and
   Barak, and the wife of Heber the Kenite, I am at a loss to understand.
   For it is one thing to draw up a list of military commanders in
   historical sequence, another to indicate certain figures of marriage
   which cannot be found in them. And whereas he prefers the fidelity of
   the father Jephthah to the tears of the virgin daughter, that makes for
   us. For we are not commending virgins of the world so much as those who
   are virgins for Christ's sake, and most Hebrews blame the father for
   the rash vow he made, [4393] "If thou wilt indeed deliver the children
   of Ammon into mine hand, then it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth
   of the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the
   children of Ammon, it shall be for the Lord's, and I will offer it up
   for a burnt offering." Supposing (they say) a dog or an ass had met
   him, what would he have done? Their meaning is that God so ordered
   events that he who had improvidently made a vow, should learn his error
   by the death of his daughter. And if Samuel who was brought up in the
   tabernacle married a wife, how does that prejudice virginity? As if at
   the present day also there were not many married priests, and as though
   the Apostle did not [4394] describe a bishop as the husband of one
   wife, having children with all purity. At the same time we must not
   forget that Samuel was a Levite, not a priest or high-priest. Hence it
   was that his mother made for him a linen ephod, that is, a linen
   garment to go over the shoulders, which was the proper dress of the
   Levites and of the inferior order. And so he is not named in the Psalms
   among the priests, but among those who call upon the name of the Lord:
   [4395] "Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among those who
   call upon his name." For [4396] Levi begat Kohath, Kohath begat
   Amminadab, Amminadab begat Korah, Korah begat Assir, Assir begat
   Elkanah, Elkanah begat Zuph, Zuph begat Tahath, Tahath begat Eliel,
   Eliel begat Jeroham, Jeroham begat Elkanah, Elkanah begat Samuel. And
   no one doubts that the priests sprang from the stock of Aaron, Eleazar,
   and Phinees. And seeing that they had wives, they would be rightly
   brought against us, if, led away by the error of the Encratites, we
   were to maintain that marriage deserved censure, and our high priest
   were not after the order of Melchizedek, without father, without
   mother, [4397] A'genealogetos , that is, unmarried. And much fruit
   truly did Samuel reap from his children! he himself pleased God, but
   [4398] begat such children as displeased the Lord. But if in support of
   second marriage, he urges the instance of Boaz and Ruth, let him know
   that in the Gospel (S. Matt. i. 6) to typify the Church even Rahab the
   harlot is reckoned among our Lord's ancestors.

   24. He boasts that David bought his wife for two hundred foreskins. But
   he should remember that David had numerous other wives, and afterwards
   received Michal, Saul's daughter, whom her father had delivered to
   another, and when he was old got heat from the embrace of the
   Shunammite maiden. And I do not say this because I am bold enough to
   disparage holy men, but because it is one thing to live under the law,
   another to live under the Gospel. David slew Uriah the Hittite and
   committed adultery with Bathsheba. And because he was a man of
   blood--the reference is not, as some think, to his wars, but to the
   [4399] murder--he was not permitted to build a temple of the Lord. But
   as for us, [4400] if we cause one of the least to stumble, and if we
   say to a brother [4401] Raca, or [4402] use our eyes improperly, it
   were good that a millstone were hanged about our neck, we shall be in
   danger of Gehenna, and a mere glance will be reckoned to us for
   adultery. He passes on to Solomon, through whom wisdom itself sang its
   own praises. Seeing that not content with dwelling upon his praises, he
   calls him uxorious, I am surprised that he did not add the words of the
   Canticles: [4403] "There are threescore queens, and fourscore
   concubines, and maidens without number," and those of the First Book of
   Kings; [4404] And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three
   hundred concubines, and others without number." These are they who
   turned away his heart from the Lord: and yet before he had many wives,
   and fell into sins of the flesh, at the beginning of his reign and in
   his early years he built a temple to the Lord. For every one is judged
   not for what he will be, but for what he is. But if Jovinianus approves
   the example of Solomon, he will no longer be in favour of second and
   third marriages only, but unless he has seven hundred wives and three
   hundred concubines, he cannot be the king's antitype or attain to his
   merit. I earnestly again and again remind you, my reader, that I am
   compelled to speak as I do, and that I do not disparage our
   predecessors under the law, but am well aware that they served their
   generation according to their circumstances, and fulfilled the Lord's
   command to increase, and multiply, and replenish the earth. And what is
   more they were figures of those that were to come. But we to whom it is
   said, [4405] "The time is shortened, that henceforth those that have
   wives may be as though they had none," have a different command, and
   for us virginity is consecrated by the Virgin Saviour.

   25. What folly it was to include Elijah and Elisha in a list of married
   men, is plain without a word from me. For, since John Baptist came in
   the spirit and power of Elijah, and John was a virgin, it is clear that
   he came not only in Elijah's spirit, but also in his bodily chastity.
   Then the passage relating to Hezekiah might be adduced (though
   Jovinianus with his wonted stupidity did not notice it), in which after
   his recovery and the addition of fifteen years to his life he said,
   "Now will I beget children." It must be remembered, however, that in
   the Hebrew texts the passage is not so, but runs thus: [4406] "The
   father to the children shall make known thy faithfulness." Nor need we
   wonder that Huldah, the prophetess, and wife of Shallum, was [4407]
   consulted by Josiah, King of Judah, when the captivity was approaching
   and the wrath of the Lord was falling upon Jerusalem: since it is the
   rule of Scripture when holy men fail, to praise women to the reproach
   of men. And it is superfluous to speak of Daniel, for the Hebrews to
   the present day affirm that the three youths were eunuchs, in
   accordance with the declaration of God which Isaiah utters to Hezekiah:
   [4408] "And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt
   beget, shall they take away: and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of
   the King of Babylon." And again in Daniel we read: [4409] "And the king
   spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring in
   certain of the children of Israel, even of the seed royal and of the
   nobles: youth in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in
   all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science." The
   conclusion is that if Daniel and the three youths were chosen from the
   seed royal, and if Scripture foretold that that there should be eunuchs
   of the seed royal, these men were those who were made eunuchs. If he
   meets us with the argument that in Ezekiel [4410] it is said that Noah,
   Daniel and Job in a sinful land could not free their sons and
   daughters, we reply that the words are used hypothetically. Noah and
   Job were not in existence at that time: we know that they lived many
   ages before. And the meaning is this: if there were such and such men
   in a sinful land, they shall not be able to save their own sons and
   daughters: because the righteousness of the father shall not save the
   son, nor shall the sin of one be imputed to another. [4411] "For the
   soul that sinneth, it shall die." This, too, must be said, that Daniel,
   as the history of his book shows, was taken captive with King Jehoiakim
   at the same time that Ezekiel was also led into captivity. How then
   could he have sons who was still a youth? And only three years had
   elapsed when he was brought in to wait upon the king. Let no one
   suppose that Ezekiel at this time remembers Daniel as a man, not as a
   youth; for "It came to pass," he says, [4412] "in the sixth year," that
   is of King Jehoiakim, "in the sixth month, in the fifth day of the
   month:" and, "as I sat in my house, and the elders of Judah sat before
   me." Yet on that same day it was said to him, [4413] "Though these
   three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it." Daniel was therefore a
   youth, and known to the people, either on account of his interpretation
   of the king's dreams, [4414] or on account of the release of Susannah,
   and the slaying of the elders. And it is clearly proved that at the
   time these things were spoken of Noah, Daniel, and Job, Daniel was
   still a youth and could not have had sons and daughters, whom he might
   save by his righteousness. So far concerning the Law.

   26. Coming to the Gospel he sets before us Zacharias and Elizabeth,
   Peter and his mother-in-law, and, with a shamelessness to which we have
   now grown accustomed, fails to understand that they, too, ought to have
   been reckoned among those who served the Law. For the Gospel had no
   being before the crucifixion of Christ--it was consecrated by His
   passion and by His blood. In accordance with this rule Peter and the
   other Apostles (I must give Jovinianus something now and then out of my
   abundance) had indeed wives, but those which they had taken before they
   knew the Gospel. But once they were received into the Apostolate, they
   forsook the offices of marriage. For when Peter, representing the
   Apostles, says to the Lord: [4415] "Lo we have left all and followed
   thee," the Lord answered him, [4416] "Verily I say unto you, there is
   no man that hath left house or wife, or brethren, or parents, or
   children for the kingdom of God's sake, who shall not receive manifold
   more in this time, and in the world to come eternal life." But if, in
   order to show that all the Apostles had wives, he meets us with the
   words [4417] "Have we no right to lead about women or wives" (for gune
   in Greek has both meanings) "even as the rest of the apostles, and
   Cephas, and the brethren of the Lord?" let him add what is found in the
   Greek copies, "Have we no right to lead about women that are sisters,
   or wives?" This makes it clear that the writer referred to other holy
   women, who, in accordance with Jewish custom, ministered to their
   teachers of their substance, as we read was the practice with even our
   Lord himself. Where there is a previous reference to eating and
   drinking, and the outlay of money, and mention is afterwards made of
   women that are sisters, it is quite clear, as we have said, that we
   must understand, not wives, but those women who ministered of their
   substance. And we read the same account in the Old Testament of the
   Shunammite who was wont to welcome Elisha, and to put for him a table,
   and bread, and a candlestick, and the rest. At all events if we take
   gunaikas to mean wives, not women, the addition of the word sisters
   destroys the effect of the word wives, and shews that they were related
   in spirit, not by wedlock. Nevertheless, with the exception of the
   Apostle Peter, it is not openly stated that the Apostles had wives; and
   since the statement is made of one while nothing is said about the
   rest, we must understand that those of whom Scripture gives no such
   description had no wives. Yet Jovinianus, who has arrayed against us
   Zacharias and Elizabeth, Peter and his wife's mother, should know, that
   John was the son of Zacharias and Elizabeth, that is, a virgin was the
   offspring of marriage, the Gospel of the law, chastity of matrimony; so
   that by a virgin prophet the virgin Lord might be both announced and
   baptized. But we might say concerning Peter, that he had a
   mother-in-law when he believed, and no longer had a wife, although in
   the [4418] "Sentences" we read of both his wife and daughter. But for
   the present our argument must be based wholly on Scripture. He has made
   his appeal to the Apostles, because he thinks that they, who hold the
   chief authority in our moral system and are the typical Christian
   teachers, were not virgins. If, then, we allow that they were not
   virgins (and, with the exception of Peter, the point cannot be proved),
   yet I must tell him that it is to the Apostles that the words of Isaiah
   relate: [4419] "Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us a small
   remnant, we should have been as Sodom, we should have been like unto
   Gomorrah." So, then, they who were by birth Jews could not under the
   Gospel recover the virginity which they had lost in Judaism. And yet
   John, one of the disciples, who is related to have been the youngest of
   the Apostles, and who was a virgin when he embraced Christianity,
   remained a virgin, and on that account was more beloved by our Lord,
   and lay upon the breast of Jesus. And what Peter, who had had a wife,
   did not dare ask, [4420] he requested John to ask. And after the
   resurrection, when Mary Magdalene told them that the Lord had risen,
   [4421] they both ran to the sepulchre, but John outran Peter. And when
   they were fishing in the ship on the lake of Gennesaret, Jesus stood
   upon the shore, and the Apostles knew not who it was they saw; [4422]
   the virgin alone recognized a virgin, and said to Peter, "It is the
   Lord." Again, after hearing the prediction that he must be bound by
   another, and led whither he would not, and must suffer on the cross,
   Peter said, "Lord what shall this man do?" being unwilling to desert
   John, with whom he had always been united. Our Lord said to him, "What
   is that to thee if I wish him so to be?" Whence the saying went abroad
   among the brethren that that disciple should not die. Here we have a
   proof that virginity does not die, and that the defilement of marriage
   is not washed away by the blood of martyrdom, but virginity abides with
   Christ, and its sleep is not death but a passing to another state. If,
   however, Jovinianus should obstinately contend that John was not a
   virgin, (whereas we have maintained that his virginity was the cause of
   the special love our Lord bore to him), let him explain, if he was not
   a virgin, why it was that he was loved more than the other Apostles.
   But you say, [4423] the Church was founded upon Peter: although [4424]
   elsewhere the same is attributed to all the Apostles, and they all
   receive the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the strength of the
   Church depends upon them all alike, yet one among the twelve is chosen
   so that when a head has been appointed, there may be no occasion for
   schism. But why was not John chosen, who was a virgin? Deference was
   paid to age, because Peter was the elder: one who was a youth, I may
   say almost a boy, could not be set over men of advanced age; and a good
   master who was bound to remove every occasion of strife among his
   disciples, and who had said to them, [4425] "Peace I leave with you, my
   peace I give unto you," and, [4426] "He that is the greater among you,
   let him be the least of all," would not be thought to afford cause of
   envy against the youth whom he had loved. We maybe sure that John was
   then a boy because ecclesiastical history most clearly proves that he
   lived to the reign of Trajan, that is, he fell asleep in the
   sixty-eighth year after our Lord's passion, as I have briefly noted in
   my treatise on Illustrious Men. [4427] Peter is an Apostle, and John is
   an Apostle--the one a married man, the other a virgin; but Peter is an
   Apostle only, John is both an Apostle and an Evangelist, and a prophet.
   An Apostle, because he wrote to the Churches as a master; an
   Evangelist, because he composed a Gospel, a thing which no other of the
   Apostles, excepting Matthew, did; a prophet, for he saw in the island
   of Patmos, to which he had been banished by the Emperor Domitian as a
   martyr for the Lord, an Apocalypse containing the boundless mysteries
   of the future. Tertullian, more over, relates that he was sent to Rome,
   and that having been plunged into a jar of boiling oil he came out
   fresher and more active than when he went in. But his very Gospel is
   widely different from the rest. Matthew as though he were writing of a
   man begins thus: "The book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, the son
   of David, the son of Abraham;" Luke begins with the priesthood of
   Zacharias; Mark with a prophecy of the prophets Malachi and Isaiah. The
   first has the face of a man, on account of the genealogical table; the
   second, the face of a calf, on account of the priesthood; the third,
   the face of a lion, on account of the voice of one crying in the
   desert, [4428] "Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make His paths
   straight." But John like an eagle soars aloft, and reaches the Father
   Himself, and says, [4429] "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
   was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with
   God," and so on. The virgin writer expounded mysteries which the
   married could not, and to briefly sum up all and show how great was the
   privilege of John, or rather of virginity in John, the Virgin Mother
   [4430] was entrusted by the Virgin Lord to the Virgin disciple.

   27. But we toil to no purpose. For our opponent urges against us the
   Apostolic sentence and says, [4431] "Adam was first formed, then Eve;
   and Adam was not beguiled, but the woman being beguiled hath fallen
   into transgression: but she shall be saved through the child-bearing,
   if they continue in faith and love and sanctification with sobriety."
   Let us consider what led the Apostle to make this declaration: [4432]
   "I desire therefore that the men pray in every place, lifting up holy
   hands, without wrath and disputing." So in due course he lays down
   rules of life for the women and says "In like manner that women adorn
   themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not
   with braided hair, and gold or pearls or costly raiment; but (which
   becometh women professing godliness) through good works. Let a woman
   learn in quietness with all subjection. But I permit not a woman to
   teach, nor to have dominion over a man, but to be in quietness." And
   that the lot of a woman might not seem a hard one, reducing her to the
   condition of a slave to her husband, the Apostle recalls the ancient
   law and goes back to the first example: that Adam was first made, then
   the woman out of his rib; and that the Devil could not seduce Adam, but
   did seduce Eve; and that after displeasing God she was immediately
   subjected to the man, and began to turn to her husband; and he points
   out that she who was once tied with the bonds of marriage and was
   reduced to the condition of Eve, might blot out the [4433] old
   transgression by the [4434] procreation of children: provided, however,
   that she bring up the children themselves in the faith and love of
   Christ, and in sanctification and chastity; for we must not adopt the
   faulty reading of the Latin texts, sobrietas, but castitas, that is,
   [4435] sophrosune . You see how you are mastered by the witness of this
   passage also, and cannot but be driven to admit that what you thought
   was on the side of marriage tells in favour of virginity. For if the
   woman is saved in child-bearing, and the more the children the greater
   the safety of the mothers, why did he add "if they continue in faith
   and love and sanctification with chastity"? The woman will then be
   saved, if she bear not children who will remain virgins: if what she
   has herself lost, she attains in her children, and makes up for the
   loss and decay, of the root by the excellence of the flower and fruit.

   28. Above, in passing, when our opponent adduced Solomon, who, although
   he had many wives, nevertheless built the temple, I briefly replied
   that it was my intention to run over the remaining points. Now that he
   may not cry out that both Solomon and others under the law, prophets
   and holy men, have been dishonoured by us, let us show what this very
   man with his many wives and concubines thought of marriage. For no one
   can know better than he who suffered through them, what a wife or woman
   is. Well then, he says in the Proverbs: [4436] "The foolish and bold
   woman comes to want bread." What bread? Surely that bread which cometh
   down from heaven: and he immediately adds [4437] "The earth-born perish
   in her house, rush into the depths of hell." Who are the earth-born
   that perish in her house? They of course who follow the first Adam, who
   is of the earth, and not the second, who is from heaven. And again in
   another place: "Like a worm in wood, so a wicked woman destroyeth her
   husband." But if you assert that this was spoken of bad wives, I shall
   briefly answer: What necessity rests upon me to run the risk of the
   wife I marry proving good or bad? [4438] "It is better," he says, "to
   dwell in a desert land, than with a contentious and passionate woman in
   a wide house." How seldom we find a wife without these faults, he knows
   who is married. Hence that sublime orator, Varius Geminus [4439] says
   well "The man who does not quarrel is a bachelor." [4440] "It is better
   to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a contentious woman
   in a house in common." If a house common to husband and wife makes a
   wife proud and breeds contempt for the husband: how much more if the
   wife be the richer of the two, and the husband but a lodger in her
   house! She begins to be not a wife, but mistress of the house; and if
   she offend her husband, they must part. [4441] "A continual dropping on
   a wintry day" turns a man out of doors, and so will a contentious woman
   drive a man from his own house. She floods his house with her constant
   nagging and daily chatter, and ousts him from his own home, that is the
   Church. Hence the same Solomon previously commands: [4442] "My son
   flows forth beyond." And the Apostle, writing to the Hebrews, says
   "Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things spoken,
   lest haply we flow forth beyond." But who can hide from himself what is
   thus enigmatically expressed? [4443] "The horseleech had three
   daughters, dearly loved, but they satisfied her not, and a fourth is
   not satisfied when you say Enough; the grave, and woman's love, and the
   earth that is not satisfied with water, and the fire that saith not,
   Enough." The horse-leech is the devil, the daughters of the devil are
   dearly loved, and they cannot be satisfied with the blood of the slain:
   the grave, and woman's love, and the earth dry and scorched with heat.
   It is not the harlot, or the adulteress who is spoken of; but woman's
   love in general is accused of ever being insatiable; put it out, it
   bursts into flame; give it plenty, it is again in need; it enervates a
   man's mind, and engrosses all thought except for the passion which it
   feeds. What we read in the parable which follows is to the same effect:
   "For three things the earth doth tremble, and for four which it cannot
   bear: for a servant when he is king: and a fool when he is filled with
   meat: for an odious woman when she is married to a good husband: and an
   handmaid that is heir to her mistress." See how a wife is classed with
   the greatest evils. But if you reply that it is an odious wife, I will
   give you the same answer as before--the mere possibility of such danger
   is in itself no light matter. For he who marries a wife is uncertain
   whether he is marrying an odious woman or one worthy of his love. If
   she be odious, she is intolerable. If worthy of love, her love is
   compared to the grave, to the parched earth, and to fire.

   29. Let us come to Ecclesiastes and adduce a few corroborative passages
   from him also. [4444] "To everything there is a season, and a time to
   every purpose under the heaven: a time to be born, and a time to die: a
   time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted." We
   brought forth young under the law with Moses, let us die under the
   Gospel with Christ. We planted in marriage, let us by chastity pluck up
   that which was planted. "A time to embrace, and a time to refrain from
   embracing: a time to love, and a time to hate: a time for war, and a
   time for peace." And at the same time he warns us not to prefer the law
   to the Gospel; nor to think that virgin purity is to be placed on a
   level with marriage: [4445] "Better," he says, "is the end of a thing
   than the beginning thereof." And he immediately adds: "Say not thou,
   what is the cause that the former days were better than these? for thou
   dost not inquire wisely concerning this." And he gives the reason why
   the latter days are better than the former: [4446] "For wisdom with an
   inheritance is good." Under the law carnal wisdom was followed by the
   sword of death; under the Gospel an eternal inheritance awaits
   spiritual wisdom. "Behold, this have I found, [4447] saith the
   Preacher, one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all
   those have I not found. Behold this only have I found, that God made
   man upright; but they have sought out many inventions." He says that he
   had found man upright. Consider the force of the words. The word man
   comprehends both male and female. "But a woman," he says, "among all
   these have I not found." Let us read the beginning of Genesis, and we
   shall find Adam, that is man, called both male and female. Having then
   been created by God good and upright, by our own fault we have fallen
   to a worse condition; and that which in Paradise had been upright, when
   we left Paradise was corrupt. If you object that before they sinned
   there was a distinction in sex between male and female, and that they
   could without sin have come together, it is uncertain what might have
   happened. For we cannot know the judgements of God, and anticipate his
   sentence as we choose. What really happened is plain enough,--that they
   who in Paradise remained in perpetual virginity, when they were
   expelled from Paradise were joined together. Or if Paradise admits of
   marriage, and there is no difference between marriage and virginity,
   what prevented their previous intercourse even in Paradise? They are
   driven out of Paradise; and what they did not there, they do on earth;
   so that from the very earliest days of humanity virginity was
   consecrated by Paradise, and marriage by earth. [4448] "Let thy
   garments be always white." The eternal whiteness of our garments is the
   purity of virginity. In the morning we sowed our seed, and in the
   evening let us not cease. Let us who served marriage under the law,
   serve virginity under the Gospel.

   30. I pass to the Song of Songs, and whereas our opponent thinks it
   makes altogether for marriage, I shall show that it contains the
   mysteries of virginity. Let us hear what the bride says before that the
   bridegroom comes to earth, suffers, descends to the lower world, and
   rises again. [4449] "We will make for thee likenesses of gold with
   ornaments of silver while the king sits at his table." Before the Lord
   rose again, and the Gospel shone, the bride had not gold, but
   likenesses of gold. As for the silver, however, which she professes to
   have at the marriage, she not only had silver ornaments, but she had
   them in variety--in widows, in the continent, and in the married. Then
   the bridegroom makes answer to the bride, and teaches her that the
   shadow of the old law has passed away, and the truth of the Gospel has
   come. [4450] "Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away, for lo, the
   winter is past, the rain is over and gone." This relates to the Old
   Testament. Once more he speaks of the Gospel and of virginity: "The
   flowers appear on the earth, the time of the pruning of vines has
   come." Does he not seem to you to say the very same thing that the
   Apostle says: [4451] "The time is shortened that henceforth both those
   that have wives may be as though they had none"? And more plainly does
   he herald chastity: [4452] "The voice," he says, "of the turtle is
   heard in our land." The turtle, the chastest of birds, always dwelling
   in lofty places, is a type of the Saviour. Let us read the works of
   naturalists and we shall find that it is the nature of the turtle-dove,
   if it lose its mate, not to take another; and we shall understand that
   second marriage is repudiated even by dumb birds. And immediately the
   turtle says to its fellow: [4453] "The fig tree hath put forth its
   green figs," that is, the commandments of the old law have fallen, and
   the blossoming vines of the Gospel give forth their fragrance. Whence
   the Apostle also says, [4454] "We are a sweet savour of Christ." [4455]
   "Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away. O my dove, thou art in the
   clefts of the rock, in the covert of the steep place. Let me see thy
   countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy
   countenance is comely." [4456] Whilst thou coveredst thy countenance
   like Moses and the veil of the law remained, I neither saw thy face,
   nor did I condescend to hear thy voice. I said, [4457] "Yea, when ye
   make many prayers, I will not hear." But now with unveiled face behold
   my glory, and shelter thyself in the cleft and steep places of the
   solid rock. On hearing this the bride disclosed the mysteries of
   chastity: [4458] "My beloved is mine, and I am his: he feedeth his
   flock among the lilies," that is among the pure virgin bands. Would you
   know what sort of a throne our true Solomon, the Prince of Peace, has,
   and what his attendants are like? [4459] "Behold," he says, "it is the
   litter of Solomon: threescore mighty men are about it, of the mighty
   men of Israel. They all handle the sword, and are expert in war: every
   man hath his sword upon his thigh." They who are about Solomon have
   their sword upon their thigh, like Ehud, the left-handed judge, who
   slew the fattest of foes, a man devoted to the flesh, and cut short all
   his pleasures. [4460] "I will get me," he says, "to the mountain of
   myrrh;" to those, that is, who have mortified their bodies; "and to the
   hill of frankincense," to the crowds of pure virgins; "and I will say
   to my bride, thou art all fair, my love, and there is no spot in thee."
   Whence too the Apostle: [4461] "That he might present the church to
   himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such
   thing." [4462] "Come with me from Lebanon, my bride, with me from
   Lebanon. Thou shalt come [4463] and pass on from the beginning of
   faith, from the top of Sanir and Hermon, from the lions' dens, from the
   mountains of the leopards." Lebanon is, being interpreted, whiteness.
   Come then, fairest bride, concerning whom it is elsewhere said [4464]
   "Who is she that cometh up, all in white?" and pass on by way of this
   world, from the beginning of faith, and from Sanir, which is by
   interpretation, God of light, as we read in the psalm: [4465] "Thy word
   is a lantern unto my feet, and light unto my path;" and "from Hermon,"
   that is, consecration: and "flee from the lions' dens, and the
   mountains of the leopards who cannot change their spots." Flee, he
   says, from the lions' dens, flee from the pride of devils, that when
   thou hast been consecrated to me, I may be able to say unto thee:
   [4466] "Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my bride, thou hast
   ravished mine heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy
   neck." What he says is something like this--I do not reject marriage:
   you have a second eye, the left, which I have given to you on account
   of the weakness of those who cannot see the right. But I am pleased
   with the right eye of virginity, and if it be blinded the whole body is
   in darkness. And that we might not think he had in view carnal love and
   bodily marriage, he at once excludes this meaning by saying [4467]
   "Thou hast ravished my heart, my bride, my sister." The name sister
   excludes all suspicion of unhallowed love. "How fair are thy breasts
   with wine," those breasts concerning which he had said above, My
   beloved is mine, and I am his: "betwixt my breasts shall he lie," that
   is in the princely portion of the heart where the Word of God has its
   lodging. What wine is that which gives beauty to the breasts of the
   bride, and fills them with the milk of chastity? That, forsooth, of
   which the bridegroom goes on to speak: [4468] "I have drunk my wine
   with my milk. Eat, O friends: yea, drink and be drunken, my brethren."
   Hence the Apostles also were said to be filled with new wine; with new,
   he says, not with old wine; because [4469] new wine is put into fresh
   wine-skins, and they [4470] did not walk in oldness of the letter, but
   in newness of the Spirit. This is wine wherewith when youths and
   maidens are intoxicated, they at once thirst for virginity; they are
   filled with the spirit of chastity, and the prophecy of Zechariah comes
   to pass, at least if we follow the Hebrew literally, for he prophesied
   concerning virgins: [4471] "And the streets of the city shall be full
   of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof. For what is his
   goodness, and what is his beauty, but the corn of the elect, and wine
   that giveth birth to virgins?" They are virgins of whom it is written
   in the forty-fifth psalm: [4472] "The virgins her companions that
   follow her shall be brought unto thee. With gladness and rejoicing
   shall they be led: they shall enter into the King's palace."

   31. Then follows: [4473] "A garden shut up is my sister, my bride: a
   garden shut up, a fountain sealed." That which is shut up and sealed
   reminds us of the mother of our Lord who was a mother and a Virgin.
   Hence it was that no one before or after our Saviour was laid in his
   new tomb, hewn in the solid rock. And yet she that was ever a Virgin is
   the mother of many virgins. For next we read: "Thy shoots are an
   orchard of pomegranates with precious fruits." By pomegranates and
   fruits is signified the blending of all virtues in virginity. [4474]
   "My beloved is white and ruddy"; white in virginity, ruddy in
   martyrdom. And because He is white and ruddy, therefore it is
   immediately added [4475] "His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is
   altogether lovely." The virgin bridegroom having been praised by the
   virgin bride, in turn praises the virgin bride, and says to her: [4476]
   "How beautiful are thy feet in sandals, [4477] O daughter of Aminadab,"
   which is, being interpreted, a people that offereth itself willingly.
   For virginity is voluntary, and therefore the steps of the Church in
   the beauty of chastity are praised. This is not the time for me like a
   commentator to explain all the mysteries of virginity from the Song of
   Songs; I have no doubt that the fastidious reader will turn up his nose
   at what has already been said.

   32. Isaiah tells of the mystery of our faith and hope: [4478] "Behold a
   virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name
   Emmanuel." I know that the Jews are accustomed to meet us with the
   objection that in Hebrew the word Almah does not mean a virgin, but a
   young woman. And, to speak truth, a virgin is properly called Bethulah,
   but a young woman, or a girl, is not Almah, but Naarah! [4479] What
   then is the meaning of Almah? A hidden virgin, that is, not merely
   virgin, but a virgin and something more, because not every virgin is
   hidden, shut off from the occasional sight of men. Then again, Rebecca,
   on account of her extreme purity, and because she was a type of the
   Church which she represented in her own virginity, is described in
   Genesis as Almah, not Bethulah, as may clearly be proved from the words
   of Abraham's servant, spoken by him in Mesopotamia: [4480] "And he
   said, O Lord, the God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my
   way which I go: behold I stand by the fountain of water; and let it
   come to pass, that the maiden which cometh forth to draw, to whom I
   shall say, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of this pitcher to
   drink; and she shall say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw
   for thy camels: let the same be the woman whom the Lord hath appointed
   for my master's son." Where he speaks of the maiden coming forth to
   draw water, the Hebrew word is Almah, that is, a virgin secluded, and
   guarded by her parents with extreme care. Or, if this be not so, let
   them at least show me where the word is applied to married women as
   well, and I will confess my ignorance. "Behold a virgin shall conceive
   and bear a son." If virginity be not preferred to marriage, why did not
   the Holy Spirit choose a married woman, or a widow? For at that time
   Anna the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser, was alive,
   distinguished for purity, and always free to devote herself to prayers
   and fasting in the temple of God. If the life, and good works, and
   fasting without virginity can merit the advent of the Holy Spirit, she
   might well have been the mother of our Lord. Let us hasten to the rest:
   [4481] "The virgin daughter of Zion hath despised thee and laughed thee
   to scorn." To her whom he called daughter the prophet also gave the
   title virgin, for fear that if he spoke only of a daughter, it might be
   supposed that she was married. This is the virgin daughter whom
   elsewhere he thus addresses: [4482] "Sing, O barren, thou that dost not
   bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not
   travail with child: for more are the children of the desolate, than the
   children of the married wife, saith the Lord." This is she of whom God
   by the mouth of Jeremiah speaks, saying: [4483] "Can a maid forget her
   ornaments, or a bride her attire." Concerning her we read of a great
   miracle in the same prophecy [4484] --that a woman should compass a
   man, and that the Father of all things should be contained in a
   virgin's womb.

   33. "Granted," says Jovinianus, "that there is a difference between
   marriage and virginity, what have you to say to this,--Suppose a virgin
   and a widow were baptized, and continued as they were, what difference
   will there be between them?" What we have already said concerning Peter
   and John, Anna and Mary, may be of service here. For if there is no
   difference between a virgin and a widow, both being baptized, because
   baptism makes a new man, upon the same principle harlots and
   prostitutes, if they are baptized, will be equal to virgins. If
   previous marriage is no prejudice to a baptized widow, and past
   pleasures and the exposure of their bodies to public lust are no
   detriment in the case of harlots, once they have approached the laver
   they will gain the rewards of virginity. It is one thing to unite with
   God a mind pure and free from any stain of memory, another to remember
   the foul and forced embraces of a man, and in recollection to act a
   part which you do not in person. Jeremiah, who was [4485] sanctified in
   the womb, and was known in his mother's belly, enjoyed the high
   privilege because he was predestined to the blessing of virginity. And
   when all were captured, and even the vessels of the temple were
   plundered by the King of Babylon, he alone was [4486] liberated by the
   enemy, knew not the insults of captivity, and was supported by the
   conquerors; and Nebuchadnezzar, though he gave Nebuzaradan no charge
   concerning the Holy of Holies, did give him charge concerning Jeremiah.
   For that is the true temple of God, and that is the Holy of Holies,
   which is consecrated to the Lord by pure virginity. On the other hand,
   Ezekiel, who was kept captive in Babylon, who saw the [4487] storm
   approaching from the north, and the whirlwind sweeping all before it,
   says, [4488] "My wife died in the evening and I did in the morning as I
   was commanded." For the Lord had previously told him that in that day
   he should open his mouth, and speak, and no longer keep silence. Mark
   well, that while his wife was living he was not at liberty to admonish
   the people. His wife died, the bond of wedlock was broken, and without
   the least hesitation he constantly devoted himself to the prophetic
   office. For he who was called being free, is truly the Lord's
   bondservant. I do not deny the blessedness of widows who remain such
   after their baptism; nor do I disparage those wives who maintain their
   chastity in wedlock; but as they attain a greater reward with God than
   married women who pay the marriage due, let widows themselves be
   content to give the preference to virginity. For if a chastity which
   comes too late, when the glow of bodily pleasure is no longer felt,
   makes them feel superior to married women, why should they not
   acknowledge themselves inferior to perpetual virginity.

   34. All that goes for nothing, says Jovinianus, because even bishops,
   priests, and deacons, husbands of one wife, and having children, were
   appointed by the Apostle. Just as the Apostle [4489] says he has no
   commandment respecting virgins, and yet gives his advice, as one who
   had obtained mercy from the Lord, and is anxious throughout the whole
   discussion to give virginity the preference over marriage, and advises
   what he does not venture to command, lest he seem to lay a snare, and
   to put a heavier burden upon man's nature than it can bear; so also in
   establishing the constitution of the Church, inasmuch as the elements
   of the early Church were drawn from the Gentiles, he made the rules for
   fresh believers somewhat lighter that they might not in alarm shrink
   from keeping them. Then, again, the Apostles and elders wrote [4490]
   letters from Jerusalem that no heavier burden should be laid on Gentile
   believers than that they should keep themselves from idolatry, and from
   fornication, and from things strangled. As though they were providing
   for infant children, they gave them milk to drink, not solid food. Nor
   did they lay down rules for continence, nor hint at virginity, nor urge
   to fasting, nor repeat the directions [4491] given in the Gospel to the
   Apostles, not to have two tunics, nor scrip, nor money in their
   girdles, nor staff in their hand, nor shoes on their feet. And they
   certainly did not bid them, [4492] if they wished to be perfect, go and
   sell all that they had and give to the poor, and "come follow me." For
   if the young man who boasted of having done all that the law enjoins,
   when he heard this went away sorrowful, because he had great
   possessions, and the Pharisees derided an utterance such as this from
   our Lord's lips: how much more would the vast multitude of Gentiles,
   whose highest virtue consisted in not plundering another's goods, have
   repudiated the obligation of perpetual chastity and continence, when
   they were told in the letter to keep themselves from idols, and from
   fornication, seeing that fornication was heard of among them, and such
   fornication as was not "even among the Gentiles." But the very choice
   of a bishop makes for me. For he does not say: Let a bishop be chosen
   who marries one wife and begets children; but who marries one wife, and
   [4493] has his children in subjection and well disciplined. You surely
   admit that he is no bishop who during his episcopate begets children.
   The reverse is the case--if he be discovered, he will not be bound by
   the ordinary obligations of a husband, but will be condemned as an
   adulterer. Either permit [4494] priests to perform the work of marriage
   with the result that virginity and marriage are on a par: or if it is
   unlawful for priests to touch their wives, they are so far holy in that
   they imitate virgin chastity. But something more follows. A layman, or
   any believer, cannot pray unless he abstain from sexual intercourse.
   Now a priest must always offer sacrifices for the people: he must
   therefore always pray. And if he must always pray, he must always be
   released from the duties of marriage. For even under the old law they
   who used to offer sacrifices for the people not only remained in their
   houses, but purified themselves for the occasion by separating from
   their wives, nor would they drink wine or strong drink which are wont
   to stimulate lust. That married men are elected to the priesthood, I do
   not deny: the number of virgins is not so great as that of the priests
   required. Does it follow that because all the strongest men are chosen
   for the army, weaker men should not be taken as well? All cannot be
   strong. If an army were constituted of strength only, and numbers went
   for nothing, the feebler men might be rejected. As it is, men of second
   or third-rate strength are chosen, that the army may have its full
   numerical complement. How is it, then, you will say, that frequently at
   the ordination of priests a virgin is passed over, and a married man
   taken? Perhaps because he lacks other qualifications in keeping with
   virginity, or it may be that he is thought a virgin, and is not: or
   there may be a stigma on his virginity, or at all events virginity
   itself makes him proud, and while he plumes himself on mere bodily
   chastity, he neglects other virtues; he does not cherish the poor: he
   is too fond of money. It sometimes happens that a man has a gloomy
   visage, a frowning brow, a walk as though he were in a solemn
   procession, and so offends the people, who, because they have no fault
   to find with his life, hate his mere dress and gait. Many are chosen
   not out of affection for themselves, but out of hatred for another. In
   most cases the election is won by mere simplicity, while the shrewdness
   and discretion of another candidate elicit opposition as though they
   were evils. Sometimes the judgement of the commoner people is at fault,
   and in testing the qualities of the priesthood, the individual inclines
   to his own character, with the result that he looks not so much for a
   good candidate as for one like himself. Not unfrequently it happens
   that married men, who form the larger portion of the people, in
   approving married candidates seem to approve themselves, and it does
   not occur to them that the mere fact that they prefer a married person
   to a virgin is evidence of their inferiority to virgins. What I am
   going to say will perhaps offend many. Yet I will say it, and good men
   will not be angry with me, because they will not feel the sting of
   conscience. Sometimes it is the fault of the bishops, who choose into
   the ranks of the clergy not the best, but the cleverest, men, and think
   the more simple as well as innocent ones incapable; or, as though they
   were distributing the offices of an earthly service, they give posts to
   their kindred and relations; or they listen to the dictates of wealth.
   And, worse than all, they give promotion to the clergy who besmear them
   with flattery. To take the other view, if the Apostle's meaning be that
   marriage is necessary in a bishop, the Apostle himself ought not to
   have been a bishop, for he said, [4495] "Yet I would that all men were
   even as I myself." And John will be thought unworthy of this rank, and
   all the virgins, and the continent, the fairest gems that give grace
   and ornament to the Church. Bishop, priest, and deacon, are not
   honourable distinctions, but names of offices. And we do not read:
   [4496] "If a man seeketh the office of a bishop, he desireth a good
   degree," but, "he desireth a good work," because by being placed in the
   higher order an opportunity is afforded him, if he choose to avail
   himself of it, for the practice of virtue.

   35. "The bishop, then, must be without reproach, so that he is the
   slave of no vice: "the husband of one wife," that is, in the past, not
   in the present; "sober," or [4497] better, as it is in the Greek,
   "vigilant," that is nephaleon; "chaste," for that is the [4498] meaning
   of sophrona; [4499] "distinguished," both by chastity and conduct:
   "hospitable," so that he imitates Abraham, and with strangers, nay
   rather in strangers, entertains Christ; "apt to teach," for it profits
   nothing to enjoy the consciousness of virtue, unless a man be able to
   instruct the people intrusted to him, so that he can exhort in
   doctrine, and refute the gainsayers; [4500] "not a drunkard," for he
   who is constantly in the Holy of Holies and offers sacrifices, will not
   drink wine and strong drink, since wine is a luxury. If a bishop drink
   at all, let it be in such a way that no one will know whether he has
   drunk or not. "No striker," that is, [4501] a striker of men's
   consciences, for the Apostle is not pointing out what a boxer, but a
   pontiff ought not to do. He directly teaches what he ought to do: "but
   gentle, not contentious, no lover of money, one that ruleth well his
   own house, having his children in subjection with all chastity." See
   what chastity is required in a bishop! If his child be unchaste, he
   himself cannot be a bishop, and he offends God in the same way as did
   [4502] Eli the priest, who had indeed rebuked his sons, but because he
   had not put away the offenders, fell backwards and died before the lamp
   of God went out. [4503] "Women in like manner must be chaste," and so
   on. In every grade, and in both sexes, chastity has the chief place.
   You see then that the blessedness of a bishop, priest, or deacon, does
   not lie in the fact that they are bishops, priests, or deacons, but in
   their having the virtues which their names and offices imply.
   Otherwise, if a deacon be holier than his bishop, his lower grade will
   not give him a worse standing with Christ. If it were so, Stephen the
   deacon, the first to wear the martyr's crown, would be less in the
   kingdom of heaven than many bishops, and than Timothy and Titus, whom I
   venture to make neither inferior nor yet superior to him. Just as in
   the legions of the army there are generals, tribunes, centurions,
   javelin-men, and light-armed troops, common soldiers, and companies,
   but once the battle begins, all distinctions of rank are dropped, and
   the one thing looked for is valour: so too in this camp and in this
   battle, in which we contend against devils, not names but deeds are
   needed: and under the true commander, Christ, not the man who has the
   highest title has the greatest fame, but he who is the bravest warrior.

   36. But you will say: "If everybody were a virgin, what would become of
   the human race"? Like shall here beget like. If everyone were a widow,
   or continent in marriage, how will mortal men be propagated? Upon this
   principle there will be nothing at all for fear that something else may
   cease to exist. To put a case: if all men were philosophers, there
   would be no husbandmen. Why speak of husbandmen? there would be no
   orators, no lawyers, no teachers of the other professions. If all men
   were leaders, what would become of the soldiers? If all were the head,
   whose head would they be called, when there were no other members? You
   are afraid that if the desire for virginity were general there would be
   no prostitutes, no adulteresses, no wailing infants in town or country.
   Every day the blood of adulterers [4504] is shed, adulterers are
   condemned, and lust is raging and rampant in the very presence of the
   laws and the symbols of authority and the courts of justice. Be not
   afraid that all will become virgins: virginity is a hard matter, and
   therefore rare, because it is hard: "Many are called, few chosen." Many
   begin, few persevere. And so the reward is great for those who have
   persevered. If all were able to be virgins, our Lord would never have
   said: [4505] "He that is able to receive it, let him receive it:" and
   the Apostle would not have hesitated to give his advice,-- [4506] "Now
   concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord." Why then, you
   will say, were the organs of generation created, and why were we so
   fashioned by the all-wise creator, that we burn for one another, and
   long for natural intercourse? To reply is to endanger our modesty: we
   are, as it were, between two rocks, the [4507] Symplegades of necessity
   and virtue, on either side; and must make shipwreck of either our sense
   of shame, or of the cause we defend: If we reply to your suggestions,
   shame covers our face. If shame secures silence, in a manner we seem to
   desert our post, and to leave the ground clear to the raging foe. Yet
   it is better, as the story goes, to shut our eyes and fight like the
   [4508] blindfold gladiators, than not to repel with the shield of truth
   the darts aimed at us. I can indeed say: "Our hinder parts which are
   banished from sight, and the lower portions of the abdomen, which
   perform the functions of nature, are the Creator's work." But inasmuch
   as the physical conformation of the organs of generation testifies to
   difference of sex, I shall briefly reply: Are we never then to forego
   lust, for fear that we may have members of this kind for nothing? Why
   then should a husband keep himself from his wife? Why should a widow
   persevere in chastity, if we were only born to live like beasts? Or
   what harm does it do me if another man lies with my wife? For as the
   teeth were made for chewing, and the food masticated passes into the
   stomach, and a man is not blamed for giving my wife bread: similarly if
   it was intended that the organs of generation should always be
   performing their office, when my vigour is spent let another take my
   place, and, if I may so speak, let my wife quench her burning lust
   where she can. But what does the Apostle mean by exhorting to
   continence, if continence be contrary to nature? What does our Lord
   mean when He instructs us in the various kinds of eunuchs. [4509]
   Surely [4510] the Apostle who bids us emulate his own chastity, must be
   asked, if we are to be consistent, Why are you like other men, Paul?
   Why are you distinguished from the female sex by a beard, hair, and
   other peculiarities of person? How is it that you have not swelling
   bosoms, and are not broad at the hips, narrow at the chest? Your voice
   is rugged, your speech rough, your eyebrows more shaggy. To no purpose
   you have all these manly qualities, if you forego the embraces of
   women. I am compelled to say something and become a fool: but you have
   forced me to dare to speak. Our Lord and Saviour, [4511] Who though He
   was in the form of God, condescended to take the form of a servant, and
   became obedient to the Father even unto death, yea the death of the
   cross--what necessity was there for Him to be born with members which
   He was not going to use? He certainly was circumcised to manifest His
   sex. Why did he cause John the Apostle and John the Baptist to make
   themselves eunuchs through love of Him, after causing them to be born
   men? Let us then who believe in Christ follow His example. And if we
   knew Him after the flesh, let us no longer know Him according to the
   flesh. The substance of our resurrection bodies will certainly be the
   same as now, though of higher glory. For the Saviour after His descent
   into hell had so far the selfsame body in which He was crucified, that
   [4512] He showed the disciples the marks of the nails in His hands and
   the wound in His side. Moreover, if we deny the identity of His body
   because [4513] He entered though the doors were shut, and this is not a
   property of human bodies, we must deny also that Peter and the Lord had
   real bodies because they [4514] walked upon the water, which is
   contrary to nature. [4515] "In the resurrection of the dead they will
   neither marry nor be given in marriage, but will be like the angels."
   What others will hereafter be in heaven, that virgins begin to be on
   earth. If likeness to the angels is promised us (and there is no
   difference of sex among the angels), we shall either be of no sex as
   are the angels, or at all events which is clearly proved, though we
   rise from the dead in our own sex, we shall not perform the functions
   of sex.

   37. But why do we argue, and why are we eager to frame a clever and
   victorious reply to our opponent? [4516] "Old things have passed away,
   behold all things have become new." I will run through the utterances
   of the Apostles, and as to the instances afforded by Solomon I added
   short expositions to facilitate their being understood, so now I will
   go over the passages bearing on Christian purity and continence, and
   will make of many proofs a connected series. By this method I shall
   succeed in omitting nothing relating to chastity, and shall avoid being
   tediously long. Amongst other passages, Paul the Apostle writes to the
   Romans: [4517] "What fruit then had ye at that time in the things
   whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death. But
   now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your
   fruit unto sanctification, and the end eternal life." I suppose too
   that the end of marriage is death. But the compensating fruit of
   sanctification, fruit belonging either to virginity or to continence,
   is eternal life. And afterwards: [4518] "Wherefore, my brethren, ye
   also were made dead to the law through the body of Christ; that ye
   should be joined to another, even to him who was raised from the dead,
   that we might bring forth fruit unto God. For when we were in the
   flesh, the sinful passions, which were through the law, wrought in our
   members to bring forth fruit unto death. But now we have been
   discharged from the law, having died to that wherein we were holden; so
   that we serve in newness of the Spirit, and not in oldness of the
   letter." "When," he says, "we were in the flesh, and not in the newness
   of the Spirit but in the oldness of the letter," we did those things
   which pertained to the flesh, and bore fruit unto death. But now
   because we are dead to the law, through the body of Christ, let us bear
   fruit to God, that we may belong to Him who rose from the dead. And
   elsewhere, having previously said, [4519] "I know that the law is
   spiritual," and having discussed at some length the violence of the
   flesh which frequently drives us to do what we would not, he at last
   continues: "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me out of the
   body of this death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord." And
   again, "So then I myself with the mind serve the law of God; but with
   the flesh the law of sin." And, [4520] "There is therefore now no
   condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
   flesh. For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free
   from the law of sin and death." And more clearly in what follows he
   teaches that Christians do not walk according to the flesh but
   according to the Spirit: [4521] "For they that are after the flesh do
   mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the spirit the
   things of the spirit. For the mind of the flesh is death; but the mind
   of the spirit is life and peace: because the mind of the flesh is
   enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
   indeed can it be: and they that are in the flesh cannot please God. But
   ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of
   God dwelleth in you," and so on to where he says, [4522] "So then,
   brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh:
   for if ye live after the flesh, ye must die; but if by the spirit ye
   mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by
   the Spirit of God, these are sons of God." If the [4523] wisdom of the
   flesh is enmity against God, and they who are in the flesh cannot
   please God, I think that they who perform the functions of marriage
   love the wisdom of the flesh, and therefore are in the flesh. The
   Apostle being desirous to withdraw us from the flesh and to join us to
   the Spirit, says afterwards: [4524] "I beseech you therefore, brethren,
   by the mercies of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
   acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. And be not
   fashioned according to this world: but be ye transformed by the
   renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and
   acceptable and perfect will of God. For I say, through the grace that
   was given me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself
   more highly than he ought to think; but to think according to chastity"
   [4525] (not soberly as the Latin versions badly render), but "think,"
   he says, "according to chastity," for the Greek words are eis to
   sophronein. Let us consider what the Apostle says: "Be ye transformed
   by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good and
   acceptable and perfect will of God." What he says is something like
   this--God indeed permits marriage, He permits second marriages, and if
   necessary, prefers even third marriages to fornication and adultery.
   But we who ought to present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
   acceptable to God, which is our reasonable service, should consider,
   not what God permits, but what He wishes: that we may prove what is the
   good and acceptable and perfect will of God. It follows that what He
   merely permits is neither good, nor acceptable, nor perfect. And he
   gives his reasons for this advice: [4526] "Knowing the season, that now
   it is high time for you to awake out of sleep: for now is salvation
   nearer to us than when we first believed. The night is far spent, and
   the day is at hand." And lastly: "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
   make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof." God's
   will is one thing, His indulgence another. Whence, writing to the
   Corinthians, he says, [4527] "I, brethren, could not speak unto you as
   unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I
   have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were not
   able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal."
   He who [4528] is in the merely animal state, and does not receive the
   things pertaining to the Spirit of God (for he is foolish, and cannot
   understand them, because they are spiritually discerned), he is not fed
   with the food of perfect chastity, but with the coarse milk of
   marriage. As through man came death, so also through man came the
   resurrection of the dead. As in Adam we all die, so in Christ we shall
   all be made alive. Under the law we served the old Adam, under the
   Gospel let us serve the new Adam. For the first man Adam was made a
   living soul, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. [4529] "The
   first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is of heaven. As is
   the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly,
   such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of
   the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly. Now this I
   say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God;
   neither doth corruption inherit incorruption." This is so clear that no
   explanation can make it clearer: "Flesh and blood," he says, "cannot
   inherit the Kingdom of God, neither doth corruption inherit
   incorruption." If corruption attaches to all intercourse, and
   incorruption is characteristic of chastity, the rewards of chastity
   cannot belong to marriage. [4530] "For we know that if the earthly
   house of this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building from God, a
   house not made with hands, eternal, in the heavens. For verily in this
   we groan, longing to be clothed upon with our habitation which is from
   heaven. We are willing to be absent from the body, and to be at home
   with the Lord. Wherefore also we make it our aim, whether in the body,
   or out of the body, to be well-pleasing unto God." And by way of more
   fully explaining what he did not wish them to be he says elsewhere:
   [4531] "I espoused you to one husband, that I might present you as a
   pure virgin to Christ." But if you choose to apply the words to the
   whole Assembly of believers, and in this betrothal to Christ include
   both married women, and the twice-married, and widows, and virgins,
   that also makes for us. For whilst he invites all to chastity and to
   the reward of virginity, he shows that virginity is more excellent than
   all these conditions. And again writing to the Galatians he says:
   [4532] "Because by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified."
   Among the works of the law is marriage, and accordingly under it they
   are cursed who have no children. And if under the Gospel it is
   permitted to have children, it is one thing to make a concession to
   weakness, another to hold out rewards to virtue.

   38. Something else I will say to my friends who marry and after long
   chastity and continence begin to burn and are as wanton as the brutes:
   [4533] "Are ye so foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now
   perfected in the flesh? Did ye suffer so many things in vain?" If the
   Apostle in the case of some persons loosens the cords of continence,
   and lets them have a slack rein, he does so on account of the infirmity
   of the flesh. This is the enemy he has in view when he once more says:
   [4534] "Walk by the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the
   flesh. For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
   the flesh." It is unnecessary now to speak of the works of the flesh:
   it would be tedious, and he who chooses can easily gather them from the
   letter of the Apostle. I will only speak of the Spirit and its fruits,
   love, joy, peace, long suffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
   meekness, [4535] continence. All the virtues of the Spirit are
   supported and protected by continence, which is as it were their solid
   foundation and crowning point. Against such there is no law. [4536]
   "And they that are of Christ have crucified their flesh with the
   passions and the lusts thereof. If we live by the Spirit, by the Spirit
   let us also walk." Why do we who with Christ have crucified our flesh
   and its passions and desires again desire to do the things of the
   flesh? [4537] "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he
   that soweth unto his own flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but
   he that soweth unto the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap eternal life."
   I think that he who has a wife, so long as he reverts to the practice
   in question, that Satan may not tempt him, is sowing to the flesh and
   not to the Spirit. And he who sows to the flesh (the words are not
   mine, but the Apostle's) reaps corruption. God the Father chose us in
   Christ before the foundation of the world, that we might be holy and
   without spot before Him. [4538] We walked in the lusts of the flesh,
   doing the desires of the flesh and of the thoughts, and were children
   of wrath, even as the rest. But now He has raised us up with Him, and
   made us to sit with Him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, [4539]
   that we may put away according to our former manner of life the old
   man, which is corrupt according to the lusts of deceit, and that
   blessing may be applied to us which so finely concludes the mystical
   Epistle to the Ephesians: [4540] "Grace be with all them that love our
   Lord Jesus Christ in uncorruptness." [4541] "For our citizenship is in
   heaven; from whence also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ:
   who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be
   conformed to the body of his glory. [4542] Whatsoever things then are
   true, whatsoever are chaste, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
   things pertain to purity, let us join ourselves to these, let us follow
   these. [4543] Christ hath reconciled us in his body to God the Father
   through his death, and has presented us holy and without spot, and
   without blame before himself: in whom we have been also circumcised,
   not with the circumcision made with hands, to the spoiling of the body
   of the flesh, but with the circumcision of Christ, having been buried
   with him in baptism, wherein also we rose with him. If then we have
   risen with Christ, let us seek those things which are above, where
   Christ sitteth on the right hand of God; let us set our affections on
   things above, not upon the things that are upon the earth. For we are
   dead, and our life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ our life
   shall appear, then we also shall appear with him in glory. [4544] No
   soldier on service entangleth himself in the affairs of this life; that
   he may please him who enrolled him as a soldier. [4545] For the grace
   of God hath appeared, bringing salvation to all men, instructing us, to
   the intent that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
   purely and righteously and godly in this present world."

   39. The day would not be long enough were I to attempt to relate all
   that the Apostle enjoins concerning purity. These things are those
   concerning which our Lord said to the Apostles: [4546] "I have yet many
   things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when he,
   the Spirit of truth, is come, he shall guide you into all the truth."
   After the crucifixion of Christ, we find in the [4547] Acts of the
   Apostles that one house, that of Philip the Evangelist, produced four
   virgin daughters, to the end that Cæsarea, where the Gentile Church had
   been consecrated in the person of Cornelius the centurion, might afford
   an illustration of virginity. And whereas our Lord said in the Gospel:
   [4548] "The law and the prophets were until John," they because they
   were virgins are related to have prophesied even after John. For they
   could not be bound by the law of the Old Testament, who had shone with
   the brightness of virginity. Let us pass on to James, who was called
   the brother of the Lord, a man of such sanctity and righteousness, and
   distinguished by so rigid and perpetual a virginity, that even [4549]
   Josephus, the Jewish historian, relates that the overthrow of Jerusalem
   was due to his death. He, the first bishop of the Church at Jerusalem,
   which was composed of Jewish believers, to whom Paul went, accompanied
   by Titus and Barnabas, says in his Epistle: [4550] "Be not deceived, my
   beloved brethren. Every good gift and every perfect boon is from above,
   coming down from the Father of lights, [4551] with whom there is no
   difference, neither shadow that is cast by turning. Of his own will he
   brought us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of
   first-fruits of his creatures." Himself a virgin, he teaches virginity
   in a mystery. Every perfect gift cometh down from above, where marriage
   is unknown; and it cometh down, not from any one you please, but from
   the Father of lights, Who says to the apostles, "Ye are the light of
   the world;" with Whom there is no difference of Jew, or Gentile, nor
   does that shadow which was the companion of the law, trouble those who
   have believed from among the nations; but with His word He begat us,
   and with the word of truth, because some shadow, image, and likeness of
   truth went before in the law, that we might be the first-fruits of His
   creatures. And as He who was Himself the [4552] first begotten from the
   dead has raised all that have died in Him: so He who was a virgin,
   consecrated the first-fruits of His virgins in His own virgin self. Let
   us also consider what Peter thinks of the calling of the Gentiles:
   [4553] "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
   according to his great mercy begat us again unto a living hope by the
   resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, unto an inheritance
   incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in
   heaven for you, who by the power of God are guarded through faith unto
   a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time." Where we read of an
   inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away,
   prepared in heaven and reserved for the last time, and of the hope of
   eternal life when they will neither marry, nor be given in marriage,
   there, in other words, the privileges of virginity are described. For
   he shows as much in what follows: [4554] "Wherefore girding up the
   loins of your mind, be sober and set your hope perfectly on the grace
   that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as
   children of obedience, not fashioning yourselves according to your
   former lusts in the time of your ignorance; but like as he which called
   you is holy, be ye yourselves also holy in all manner of living;
   because it is written, ye shall be holy; for I am holy. [4555] For we
   were not redeemed with contemptible things, with silver or gold; but
   with the precious blood of a lamb without spot, Jesus Christ, [4556]
   that we might purify our souls in obedience to the truth, having been
   begotten again not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through
   the word of God, [4557] who liveth and abideth. And as living stones
   let us be built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood offering up
   spiritual sacrifices through Christ our Lord. [4558] For we are an
   elect race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God's own
   possession. [4559] Christ died for us in the flesh. Let us arm
   ourselves with the same conversation as did Christ; for he that hath
   suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin; that we should no longer
   live the rest of our time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the
   will of God. For the time past is sufficient for us when we walked in
   lasciviousness, lusts, and other vices. Great and precious are the
   promises attaching to virginity which He has given us, [4560] that
   through it we may become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped
   from the corruption that is in the world through lust. [4561] The Lord
   knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to keep the
   unrighteous under punishment unto the day of judgement, but chiefly
   them that walk after the flesh in the lust of defilement, and despise
   dominion, daring, self-willed. For they, as beasts of burden, without
   reason, think only of their belly and their lusts, railers who shall in
   their corruption be destroyed, and shall receive the reward of
   iniquity: men that count unrighteousness delight, spots and blemishes,
   thinking of nothing but their pleasures; having eyes full of adultery
   and insatiable lust, deceiving souls not yet strengthened by the love
   of Christ. For they utter swelling words and easily snare the unlearned
   with the seduction of the flesh; promising them liberty while they
   themselves are the slaves of vice, luxury, and corruption. For of what
   a man is overcome, of the same is he also brought into bondage. But if,
   after they had escaped the defilements of the world through the
   knowledge of our Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again overcome by that
   which they before overcame, the last state is become worse with them
   than the first. And it were better for them not to have known the way
   of righteousness, than, after knowing it, to turn back and forsake the
   holy commandment delivered unto them. And it has happened unto them
   according to the true proverb, the dog hath turned to his own vomit
   again, and the sow that had washed to wallowing in the mire." I have
   hesitated, for fear of being tedious, to quote the whole passage of the
   second Epistle of Peter, and have merely shown that the Holy Spirit in
   prophecy foretold the teachers of this time and their heresy. Lastly,
   he more clearly denotes them, saying, [4562] "In the last days seducing
   mockers shall come, walking after their own lusts."

   40. The Apostle has described Jovinianus speaking with swelling cheeks
   and nicely balancing his inflated utterances, promising heavenly
   liberty, when he himself is the slave of vice and self-indulgence, a
   dog returning to his vomit. For although he boasts of being a monk, he
   has exchanged his dirty tunic, bare feet, common bread, and drink of
   water, for a snowy dress, sleek skin, honey-wine and dainty dishes, for
   the sauces of [4563] Apicius and [4564] Paxamus, for baths and
   rubbings, and for the cook-shops. Is it not clear that he prefers his
   belly to Christ, and thinks his ruddy complexion worth the kingdom of
   heaven? And yet that handsome monk so fat and sleek, and of bright
   appearance, who always walks with the air of a bridegroom, must either
   marry a wife if he is to show that virginity and marriage are equal: or
   if he does not marry one, it is useless for him to bandy words with us
   when his acts are on our side. And John agrees with this almost to the
   letter: [4565] "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
   world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
   For all that is in the world is the lust of the flesh, and the lust of
   the eyes, and the pride of this life, which is not of the Father, but
   is of the world." And, "The world passeth away, and the lust thereof:
   but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever. A new commandment
   have I written unto you, which thing is true both in Christ and in you;
   because the darkness is passing away, and the true light already
   shineth." And again, [4566] "Beloved, now are we the children of God,
   and it is not yet made manifest what we shall be. But we know that, if
   he shall be manifested, we shall be like him: for we shall see him even
   as he is. And every one that hath this hope purifieth himself, even as
   he is pure. [4567] Herein is our love made perfect, if we have boldness
   in the day of judgement: that as he is, even so may we be in this
   world." The Epistle of Jude also expresses nearly the same: [4568]
   "Hating even the garment spotted by the flesh." Let us read the
   Apocalypse of John, and we shall there find the Lamb upon Mount Sion,
   [4569] and with Him "a hundred and forty-four thousand of them that
   were sealed, having His name and the name of His Father written in
   their foreheads, who sing a new song, and no one can sing that song
   save they who have been redeemed out of the earth. These are they who
   have not defiled themselves with women, for they continued virgins.
   These follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth: for they were redeemed
   from among men, first-fruits to God and to the Lamb, and in their mouth
   was found no guile, and they are without spot." [4570] Out of each
   tribe, the tribe of Dan excepted, the place of which is taken by the
   tribe of Levi, twelve thousand virgins who have been sealed are spoken
   of as future believers, who have not defiled themselves with women. And
   that we may not suppose the reference to be to those who know not
   harlots, he immediately added: "For they continued virgins." Whereby he
   shows that all who have not preserved their virginity, in comparison of
   pure and angelic chastity and of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, are
   defiled. [4571] "These are they who sing a new song which no man can
   sing except him that is a virgin. These are first-fruits unto God and
   unto the Lamb, and are without blemish." If virgins are first-fruits,
   it follows that widows and the continent in marriage, come after the
   first-fruits, that is, are in the second and third rank: nor can a lost
   people be saved unless it offer such sacrifices of chastity to God, and
   with pure victims reconcile the spotless Lamb. It would be endless work
   to explain the Gospel mystery of the ten virgins, five of whom were
   wise and five foolish. All I say now is, that as mere virginity without
   other works does not save, so all works without virginity, purity,
   continence, chastity, are imperfect. And we shall not be hindered in
   the least from taking this view by the objection of our opponent that
   our Lord was at Cana of Galilee, and joined in the marriage festivities
   when He turned water into wine. I shall very briefly reply, that He Who
   was circumcised on the eighth day, and for Whom a pair of turtle-doves
   and two young pigeons were offered on the day of purification, like
   others before He suffered, shewed His approval of Jewish custom, that
   He might not seem to give His enemies just cause for putting Him to
   death on the pretext that He destroyed the law and condemned nature.
   And even this was done for our sakes. For by going once to a marriage,
   He taught that men should marry only once. Moreover, at that time it
   was possible to injure virginity if marriage were not placed next to
   it, and the purity of widowhood in the third rank. But now when
   heretics are condemning wedlock, and despise the ordinance of God, we
   gladly hear anything he [4572] may say in praise of marriage. For the
   Church does not condemn marriage, but makes it subordinate; nor does
   she reject it, but regulates it; for she knows, as was said before,
   that [4573] in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and
   silver, but also of wood and earthenware; and that some are to honour,
   some to dishonour; and that whoever cleanses himself will be a vessel
   of honour, necessary, prepared for every good work.

   41. I have given enough and more than enough illustrations from the
   divine writings of Christian chastity and angelic virginity. But as I
   understand that our opponent in his commentaries summons us to the
   tribunal of worldly wisdom, and we are told that views of this kind are
   never accepted in the world, and that our religion has invented a dogma
   against nature, I will quickly run through Greek and Roman and Foreign
   History, and will show that virginity ever took the lead of chastity.
   Fable relates that Atalanta, the virgin of Calydonian fame, lived for
   the chase and dwelt always in the woods; in other words that she did
   not set her heart on marriage with its troubles of pregnancy and of
   sickness, but upon the nobler life of freedom and chastity. [4574]
   Harpalyce too, a Thracian virgin, is described by the famous poet; and
   so is [4575] Camilia, queen of the Volsci, on whom, when she came to
   his assistance, Turnus had no higher praise which he could bestow than
   to call her a virgin. "O Virgin, Glory of Italy!" And that famous
   daughter of [4576] Leos, the lady of the brazen house, ever a virgin,
   is related to have freed her country from pestilence by her voluntary
   death: and the blood of the virgin [4577] Iphigenia is said to have
   calmed the stormy winds. What need to tell of the Sibyls of Erythræ and
   Cumæ, and the eight others? for Varro asserts there were ten whose
   ornament was virginity, and divination the reward of their virginity.
   But if in the Æolian dialect "Sibyl" is represented by Theoboule, we
   must understand that a knowledge of the Counsel of God is rightly
   attributed to virginity alone. We read, too, that Cassandra and
   Chryseis, prophetesses of Apollo and Juno, were virgins. And there were
   innumerable priestesses of the Taurian Diana, and of Vesta. One of
   these, Munitia, being suspected of unchastily was [4578] buried alive,
   which would be in my opinion an unjust punishment, unless the violation
   of virginity were considered a serious crime. At all events how highly
   the Romans always esteemed virgins is clear from the fact that consuls
   and generals even in their triumphal chariots and bringing home the
   spoils of conquered nations, were wont to make way for them to pass.
   And so did men of all ranks. When [4579] Claudia, a Vestal Virgin, was
   suspected of unchastily, and a vessel containing the image of Cybele
   was aground in the Tiber, it is related that she, to prove her
   chastity, with her girdle drew the ship which a thousand men could not
   move. Yet, as [4580] the uncle of Lucan the poet says, it would have
   been better if this circumstance had decorated a chastity tried and
   proved, and had not pleaded in defence of a chastity equivocal. No
   wonder that we read such things of human beings, when heathen error
   also invented the virgin goddesses Minerva and Diana, and placed the
   Virgin among the twelve signs of the Zodiac, by means of which, as they
   suppose, the world revolves. It is a proof of the little esteem in
   which they held marriage that they did not even among the scorpions,
   centaurs, crabs, fishes, and capricorn, thrust in a husband and wife.
   When the thirty tyrants of Athens had slain Phidon at the banquet, they
   commanded his virgin daughters to come to them, naked like harlots, and
   there upon the ground, red with their father's blood, to act the
   wanton. For a little while they hid their grief, and then when they saw
   the revellers were intoxicated, going out on the plea of easing nature,
   they embraced one another and threw themselves into a well, that by
   death they might save their virginity. The virgin daughter of Demotion,
   chief of the Areopagites, having heard of the death of her betrothed,
   [4581] Leosthenes, who had originated the Lamian war, slew herself, for
   she declared that although in body she was a virgin, yet if she were
   compelled to accept another, she should regard him as her second
   husband, when she had given her heart to Leosthenes. So close a
   friendship long existed between Sparta and Messene that for the
   furtherance of certain religious rites they even exchanged virgins.
   Well, on one occasion when the men of Messene attempted to outrage
   fifty Lacedæmonian virgins, out of so many not one consented, but they
   all most gladly died in defence of their chastity. Whence there arose a
   long and grievous war, and in the long run [4582] Mamertina was
   destroyed. Aristoclides, tyrant of Orchomenos, fell in love with a
   virgin of Stymphalus, and when after the death of her father she took
   refuge in the temple of Diana, and embraced the image of the goddess
   and could not be dragged thence by force, she was slain on the spot.
   Her death caused such intense grief throughout Arcadia that the people
   took up arms and avenged the virgin's death. [4583] Aristomenes of
   Messene, a just man, at a time when the Lacedæmonians, whom he had
   conquered, were celebrating by night the festival called the [4584]
   Hyacinthia, carried off from the sportive bands fifteen virgins, and
   fleeing all night at full speed got away from the Spartan territory.
   His companions wished to outrage them, but he admonished them to the
   best of his power not to do so, and when certain refused to obey, he
   slew them, and restrained the rest by fear. The maidens were afterwards
   ransomed by their kinsmen, and on seeing Aristomenes condemned for
   murder would not return to their country until clasping the knees of
   the judges they beheld the protector of their chastity acquitted. How
   shall we sufficiently praise the daughters of Scedasus at Leuctra in
   Boeotia? It is related that in the absence of their father they
   hospitably entertained two youths who were passing by, and who having
   drunk to excess violated the virgins in the course of the night. Being
   unwilling to survive the loss of their virginity, the maidens inflicted
   deadly wounds on one another. Nor would it be right to omit mention of
   the Locrian virgins. They were sent to Ilium according to custom which
   had lasted for nearly a thousand years, and yet not one gave occasion
   to any idle tale or filthy rumour of virginity defiled. Could any one
   pass over in silence the seven virgins of Miletus who, when the Gauls
   spread desolation far and wide, that they might suffer no indignity at
   the hands of the enemy, escaped disgrace by death, and left to all
   virgins the lesson of their example--that noble minds care more for
   chastity than life? Nicanor having conquered and overthrown Thebes was
   himself overcome by a passion for one captive virgin, whose voluntary
   self-surrender he longed for. A captive maid, he thought, must be only
   too glad. But he found that virginity is dearer to the pure in heart
   than a kingdom, when with tears and grief he held her in his arms slain
   by her own hand. Greek writers tell also of another Theban virgin who
   had been deflowered by a Macedonian foe, and who, hiding her grief for
   a while, slew the violator of her virginity as he slept, and then
   killed herself with the sword, so that she would neither live when her
   chastity was lost, nor die before she had avenged herself.

   42. To come to the Gymnosophists of India, the opinion is
   authoritatively handed down that Budda, the founder of their religion,
   had his birth through the side of a virgin. And we need not wonder at
   this in the case of Barbarians when cultured Greece supposed that
   Minerva at her birth sprang from the head of Jove, and Father Bacchus
   from his thigh. [4585] Speusippus also, Plato's nephew, and [4586]
   Clearchus in his eulogy of Plato, and [4587] Anaxelides in the second
   book of his philosophy, relates that Perictione, the mother of Plato,
   was violated by an apparition of Apollo, and they agree in thinking
   that the prince of wisdom was born of a virgin. [4588] Timæus writes
   that the [4589] virgin daughter of [4590] Pythagoras was at the head of
   a band of virgins, and instructed them in chastity. [4591] Diodorus,
   the disciple of Socrates, is said to have had five daughters skilled in
   dialectics and distinguished for chastity, of whom a full account is
   given by Philo the master of [4592] Carneades. And mighty Rome cannot
   taunt us as though we had invented the story of the birth of our Lord
   and Saviour from a virgin; for the Romans believe that the founders of
   their city and race were the offspring of the virgin [4593] Ilia and of
   Mars.

   43. Let these allusions to the virgins of the world, brief and hastily
   gathered from many histories, now suffice. I will proceed to married
   women who were reluctant to survive the decease or violent death of
   their husbands for fear they might be forced into a second marriage,
   and who entertained a marvellous affection for the only husbands they
   had. This may teach us that second marriage was repudiated among the
   heathen. Dido, the sister of Pygmalion, having collected a vast amount
   of gold and silver, sailed to Africa, and there built Carthage. And
   when her hand was sought in marriage by Iarbas, king of Libya, she
   deferred the marriage for a while until her country was settled. Not
   long after, having raised a [4594] funeral pyre to the memory of her
   former husband Sichæus, she preferred to "burn rather than to marry."
   Carthage was built by a woman of chastity, and its end was a tribute to
   the excellence of the virtue. For the [4595] wife of Hasdrubal, when
   the city was captured and set on fire, and she saw that she could not
   herself escape capture by the Romans, took her little children in
   either hand and leaped into the burning ruins of her house.

   44. What need to tell of the wife of [4596] Niceratus, who, not
   enduring to wrong her husband, inflicted death upon herself rather than
   subject herself to the lust of the thirty tyrants whom Lysander had set
   over conquered Athens? [4597] Artemisia, also, wife of Mausolus, is
   related to have been distinguished for chastity. Though she was queen
   of Caria, and is extolled by great poets and historians, no higher
   praise is bestowed upon her than that when her husband was dead she
   loved him as much as when he was alive, and built a tomb so great that
   even to the present day all costly sepulchres are called after his
   name, mausoleums. [4598] Teuta, queen of the Illyrians, owed her long
   sway over brave warriors, and her frequent victories over Rome, to her
   marvellous chastity. The Indians and almost all the Barbarians have a
   plurality of wives. It is a law with them that the favourite wife must
   be burned with her dead husband. The wives therefore vie with one
   another for the husband's love, and the highest ambition of the rivals,
   and the proof of chastity, is to be considered worthy of death. So then
   she that is victorious, having put on her former dress and ornaments,
   lies down beside the corpse, embracing and kissing it, and to the glory
   of chastity despises the flames which are burning beneath her. I
   suppose that she who dies thus, wants no second marriage. The famous
   Alcibiades, the friend of Socrates, when Athens was conquered, fled to
   Pharnabazus, who took a bribe from Lysander the Lacedæmonian leader and
   ordered him to be slain. He was strangled, and when his head had been
   cut off it was sent to Lysander as proof of the murder, but the rest of
   his body lay unburied. His concubine, therefore, all alone, in defiance
   of the command of the cruel enemy, in the midst of strangers, and in
   the face of peril, gave him due burial, for she was ready to die for
   the dead man whom she had loved when living. Let matrons, Christian
   matrons at all events, imitate the fidelity of concubines, and exhibit
   in their freedom what she in her captivity preserved.

   45. Strato, ruler of Sidon, thought of dying by his own hand, that he
   might not be the sport of the Persians, who were close by and whose
   alliance he had discarded for the friendship of the king of Egypt. But
   he drew back in terror, and eying the sword which he had seized,
   awaited in alarm the approach of the enemy. His wife, knowing that he
   must be immediately taken, wrested the weapon from his hand, and
   pierced his side. When the body was properly laid out she lay down upon
   it in the agony of death, that she might not violate her virgin troth
   in the embraces of another. [4599] Xenophon, in describing the early
   years of the elder Cyrus, relates that when her husband Abradatas was
   slain, Panthea who had loved him intensely, placed herself beside the
   mangled body, then stabbed herself, and let her blood run into her
   husband's wounds. The [4600] queen whom the king her husband had shewn
   naked and without her knowledge to his friend, thought she had good
   cause for slaying the king. She judged that she was not beloved if it
   was possible for her to be exhibited to another. Rhodogune, daughter of
   Darius, after the death of her husband, put to death the nurse who was
   trying to persuade her to marry again. [4601] Alcestis is related in
   story to have voluntarily died for Admetus, and Penelope's chastity is
   the theme of Homer's song. Laodamia's praises are also sung by the
   poets, because, when [4602] Protesilaus was slain at Troy, she refused
   to survive him.

   46. I may pass on to Roman women; and the first that I shall mention is
   [4603] Lucretia, who would not survive her violated chastity, but
   blotted out the stain upon her person with her own blood. Duilius, the
   first Roman who won a [4604] naval triumph, took to wife a virgin,
   Bilia, of such extraordinary chastity that she was an example even to
   an age which held unchastity to be not merely vicious but monstrous.
   When he was grown old and feeble he was once in the course of a quarrel
   taunted with having bad breath. In dudgeon he betook himself home, and
   on complaining to his wife that she had never told him of it so that he
   might remedy the fault, he received the reply that she would have done
   so, but she thought that all men had foul breath as he had. In either
   case this chaste and noble woman deserves praise, whether she was not
   aware there was anything wrong with her husband, or if she patiently
   endured, and her husband discovered his unfortunate condition not by
   the disgust of a wife, but by the abuse of an enemy. At all events the
   woman who marries a second time cannot say this. Marcia, Cato's younger
   daughter, on being asked after the loss of her husband why she did not
   marry again, replied that she could not find a man who wanted her more
   than her money. Her words teach us that men in choosing their wives
   look for riches rather than for chastity, and that many in marrying use
   not their eyes but their fingers. That must be an excellent thing which
   is won by avarice! When the same lady was mourning the loss of her
   husband, and the matrons asked what day would terminate her grief, she
   replied, "The same that terminates my life." I imagine that a woman who
   thus followed her husband in heart and mind had no thought of marrying
   again. Porcia, whom [4605] Brutus took to wife, was a virgin; Cato's
   wife, [4606] Marcia, was not a virgin; but Marcia went to and fro
   between Hortensius and Cato, and was quite content to live without
   Cato; while [4607] Porcia could not live without Brutus; for women
   attach themselves closely to particular men, and to keep to one is a
   strong link in the chain of affection. When a relative urged Annia to
   marry again (she was of full age and a goodly person), she answered, "I
   shall certainly not do so. For, if I find a good man, I have no wish to
   be in fear of losing him: if a bad one, why must I put up with a bad
   husband after having had a good one?" [4608] Porcia the younger, on
   hearing a certain lady of good character, who had a second husband,
   praised in her house, replied, "A chaste and happy matron never marries
   more than once." Marcella the elder, on being asked by her mother if
   she was glad she was married, answered, "So much so that I want nothing
   more." [4609] Valeria, sister of the Messalas, when she lost her
   husband Servius, would marry no one else. On being asked why not, she
   said that to her, her husband Servius was ever alive.

   47. I feel that in giving this list of women I have said far more than
   is customary in illustrating a point, and that I might be justly
   censured by my learned reader. But what am I to do when the women of
   our time press me with apostolic authority, and before the first
   husband is buried, repeat from morning to night the precepts which
   allow a second marriage? Seeing they despise the fidelity which
   Christian purity dictates, let them at least learn chastity from the
   heathen. A book On Marriage, worth its weight in gold, passes under the
   name of [4610] Theophrastus. In it the author asks whether a wise man
   marries. And after laying down the conditions--that the wife must be
   fair, of good character, and honest parentage, the husband in good
   health and of ample means, and after saying that under these
   circumstances a wise man sometimes enters the state of matrimony, he
   immediately proceeds thus: "But all these conditions are seldom
   satisfied in marriage. A wise man therefore must not take a wife. For
   in the first place his study of philosophy will be hindered, and it is
   impossible for anyone to attend to his books and his wife. Matrons want
   many things, costly dresses, gold, jewels, great outlay, maid-servants,
   all kinds of furniture, litters and gilded coaches. Then come
   curtain-lectures the livelong night: she complains that one lady goes
   out better dressed than she: that another is looked up to by all: I am
   a poor despised nobody at the ladies' assemblies.' Why did you ogle
   that creature next door?' Why were you talking to the maid?' What did
   you bring from the market?' I am not allowed to have a single friend,
   or companion.' She suspects that her husband's love goes the same way
   as her hate. There may be in some neighbouring city the wisest of
   teachers; but if we have a wife we can neither leave her behind, nor
   take the burden with us. To support a poor wife, is hard: to put up
   with a rich one, is torture. Notice, too, that in the case of a wife
   you cannot pick and choose: you must take her as you find her. If she
   has a bad temper, or is a fool, if she has a blemish, or is proud, or
   has bad breath, whatever her fault may be--all this we learn after
   marriage. Horses, asses, cattle, even slaves of the smallest worth,
   clothes, kettles, wooden seats, cups, and earthenware pitchers, are
   first tried and then bought: a wife is the only thing that is not shown
   before she is married, for fear she may not give satisfaction. Our gaze
   must always be directed to her face, and we must always praise her
   beauty: if you look at another woman, she thinks that she is out of
   favour. She must be called my lady, her birth-day must be kept, we must
   swear by her health and wish that she may survive us, respect must be
   paid to the nurse, to the nursemaid, to the father's slave, to the
   foster-child, to the handsome hanger-on, to the curled darling who
   manages her affairs, and to the eunuch who ministers to the safe
   indulgence of her lust: names which are only a cloak for adultery. Upon
   whomsoever she sets her heart, they must have her love though they want
   her not. If you give her the management of the whole house, you must
   yourself be her slave. If you reserve something for yourself, she will
   not think you are loyal to her; but she will turn to strife and hatred,
   and unless you quickly take care, she will have the poison ready. If
   you introduce old women, and soothsayers, and prophets, and vendors of
   jewels and silken clothing, you imperil her chastity; if you shut the
   door upon them, she is injured and fancies you suspect her. But what is
   the good of even a careful guardian, when an unchaste wife cannot be
   watched, and a chaste one ought not to be? For necessity is but a
   faithless keeper of chastity, and she alone really deserves to be
   called pure, who is free to sin if she chooses. If a woman be fair, she
   soon finds lovers; if she be ugly, it is easy to be wanton. It is
   difficult to guard what many long for. It is annoying to have what no
   one thinks worth possessing. But the misery of having an ugly wife is
   less than that of watching a comely one. Nothing is safe, for which a
   whole people sighs and longs. One man entices with his figure, another
   with his brains, another with his wit, another with his open hand.
   Somehow, or sometime, the fortress is captured which is attacked on all
   sides. Men marry, indeed, so as to get a manager for the house, to
   solace weariness, to banish solitude; but a faithful slave is a far
   better manager, more submissive to the master, more observant of his
   ways, than a wife who thinks she proves herself mistress if she acts in
   opposition to her husband, that is, if she does what pleases her, not
   what she is commanded. But friends, and servants who are under the
   obligation of benefits received, are better able to wait upon us in
   sickness than a wife who makes us responsible for her tears (she will
   sell you enough to make a deluge for the hope of a legacy), boasts of
   her anxiety, but drives her sick husband to the distraction of despair.
   But if she herself is poorly, we must fall sick with her and never
   leave her bedside. Or if she be a good and agreeable wife (how rare a
   bird she is!), we have to share her groans in childbirth, and suffer
   torture when she is in danger. A wise man can never be alone. He has
   with him the good men of all time, and turns his mind freely wherever
   he chooses. What is inaccessible to him in person he can embrace in
   thought. And, if men are scarce, he converses with God. [4611] He is
   never less alone than when alone. Then again, to marry for the sake of
   children, so that our name may not perish, or that we may have support
   in old age, and leave our property without dispute, is the height of
   stupidity. For what is it to us when we are leaving the world if
   another bears our name, when even a son does not all at once take his
   father's title, and there are countless others who are called by the
   same name. Or what support in old age is he whom you bring up, and who
   may die before you, or turn out a reprobate? Or at all events when he
   reaches mature age, you may seem to him long in dying. Friends and
   relatives whom you can judiciously love are better and safer heirs than
   those whom you must make your heirs whether you like it or not. Indeed,
   the surest way of having a good heir is to ruin your fortune in a good
   cause while you live, not to leave the fruit of your labour to be used
   you know not how."

   48. When Theophrastus thus discourses, are there any of us, Christians,
   whose conversation is in heaven and who daily say [4612] "I long to be
   dissolved, and to be with Christ," whom he does not put to the blush?
   Shall a joint-heir of Christ really long for human heirs? And shall he
   desire children and delight himself in a long line of descendants, who
   will perhaps fall into the clutches of Antichrist, when we read that
   [4613] Moses and [4614] Samuel preferred other men to their own sons,
   and did not count as their children those whom they saw to be
   displeasing to God? When Cicero after [4615] divorcing Terentia was
   requested by [4616] Hirtius to marry his sister, he [4617] set the
   matter altogether on one side, and said that he could not possibly
   devote himself to a wife and to philosophy. Meanwhile that excellent
   partner, who had herself drunk wisdom at Tully's fountains, married
   [4618] Sallust his enemy, and took for her third husband Messala
   Corvinus, and thus, as it were, passed through three degrees of
   eloquence. Socrates had two wives, Xantippe and Myron, grand-daughter
   of Aristides. They frequently quarrelled, and he was accustomed to
   banter them for disagreeing about him, he being the ugliest of men,
   with snub nose, bald forehead, rough-haired, and bandy-legged. At last
   they planned an attack upon him, and having punished him severely, and
   put him to flight, vexed him for a long time. On one occasion when he
   opposed Xantippe; who from above was heaping abuse upon him, the
   termagant soused him with dirty water, but he only wiped his head and
   said, "I knew that a shower must follow such thunder as that." [4619]
   Metella, consort of L. Sulla the [4620] Fortunate (except in the matter
   of his wife) was [4621] openly unchaste. It was the common talk of
   Athens, as I learnt in my youthful years when we soon pick up what is
   bad, and yet Sulla was in the dark, and first got to know the secrets
   of his household through the abuse of his enemies. Cn. Pompey had an
   impure wife [4622] Mucia, who was surrounded by eunuchs from Pontus and
   troops of the countrymen of Mithridates. Others thought that he knew
   all and submitted to it; but a comrade told him during the campaign,
   and the conqueror of the whole world was dismayed at the sad
   intelligence. [4623] M. Cato, the Censor, had a wife Actoria Paula, a
   woman of low origin, fond of drink, violent, and (who would believe
   it?) haughty to Cato. I say this for fear anyone may suppose that in
   marrying a poor woman he has secured peace. When [4624] Philip king of
   Macedon, against whom [4625] Demosthenes thundered in his Philippics,
   was entering his bed-room as usual, his wife in a passion shut him out.
   Finding himself excluded he held his tongue, and consoled himself for
   the insult by reading a tragic poem. [4626] Gorgias the Rhetorician
   recited his excellent treatise on Concord to the Greeks, then at
   variance among themselves, at Olympia. Whereupon [4627] Melanthius his
   enemy observed: "Here is a man who teaches us concord, and yet could
   not make concord between himself his wife, and maid-servant, three
   persons in one house." The truth was that his wife envied the beauty of
   the girl, and drove the purest of men wild with daily quarrels. Whole
   tragedies of Euripides are censures on women. Hence Hermione says,
   [4628] "The counsels of evil women have beguiled me." In the
   semi-barbarous and remote city [4629] Leptis it is the custom for a
   daughter-in-law on [4630] the second day to beg the loan of a jar from
   her mother-in-law. The latter at once denies the request, and we see
   how true was the remark of [4631] Terence, ambiguously expressed on
   purpose--"How is this? do all mothers-in-law hate their
   daughters-in-law?" We read of a certain Roman noble who, when his
   friends found fault with him for having divorced a wife, beautiful,
   chaste, and rich, put out his foot and said to them, "And the shoe
   before you looks new and elegant, yet no one but myself knows where it
   pinches." Herodotus [4632] tells us that a woman puts off her modesty
   with her clothes. And our own comic poet [4633] thinks the man
   fortunate who has never been married. Why should I refer to Pasiphaë,
   [4634] Clytemnestra, and Eriphyle, the first of whom, the wife of a
   king and swimming in pleasure, is said to have lusted for a bull, the
   second to have killed her: husband for the sake of an adulterer, the
   third to have betrayed Amphiaraus, and to have preferred a gold
   necklace to the welfare of her husband. In all the bombast of tragedy
   and the overthrow of houses, cities, and kingdoms, it is the wives and
   concubines who stir up strife. Parents take up arms against their
   children: unspeakable banquets are served: and on account of the rape
   of one wretched woman Europe and Asia are involved in a ten years' war.
   We read of some who were divorced the day after they were married, and
   immediately married again. Both husbands are to blame, both he who was
   so soon dissatisfied, and he who was so soon pleased. Epicurus the
   patron of pleasure (though [4635] Metrodorus his disciple married
   Leontia) says that a wise man can seldom marry, because marriage has
   many drawbacks. And as riches, honours, bodily health, and other things
   which we call indifferent, are neither good nor bad, but stand as it
   were midway, and become good and bad according to the use and issue, so
   wives stand on the border line of good and ill. It is, moreover, a
   serious matter for a wise man to be in doubt whether he is going to
   marry a good or a bad woman. [4636] Chrysippus ridiculously maintains
   that a wise man should marry, that he may not outrage Jupiter [4637]
   Gamelius and Genethlius. For upon that principle the Latins would not
   marry at all, since they have no Jupiter who presides over marriage.
   But if, as he thinks, the life of men is determined by the names of
   gods, whoever chooses to sit will offend Jupiter [4638] Stator.

   49. Aristotle and Plutarch and our Seneca have written treatises on
   matrimony, out of which we have already made some extracts and now add
   a few more. "The love of beauty is the forgetting of reason and the
   near neighbour of madness; a foul blot little in keeping with a sound
   mind. It confuses counsel, breaks high and generous spirits, draws away
   men from great thoughts to mean ones; it makes men querulous,
   ill-tempered, foolhardy, cruelly imperious, servile flatterers, good
   for nothing, at last not even for love itself. For although in the
   intensity of passion it burns like a raging fire, it wastes much time
   through suspicions, tears, and complaints: it begets hatred of itself,
   and at last hates itself." The course of love is laid bare in Plato's
   Phædrus from beginning to end, and Lysias explains all its
   drawbacks--how it is led not by reason, but by frenzy, and in
   particular is a harsh gaoler over lovely wives. Seneca, too, relates
   that he knew an accomplished man who before going out used to tie his
   wife's garter upon his breast, and could not bear to be absent from her
   for a quarter of an hour; and this pair would never take a drink unless
   husband and wife alternately put their lips to the cup; and they did
   other things just as absurd in the extravagant outbursts of their warm
   but blind affection. Their love was of honourable birth, but it grew
   out of all proportion. And it makes no difference how honourable may be
   the cause of a man's insanity. Hence [4639] Xystus in his Sentences
   tells us that "He who too ardently loves his own wife is an adulterer."
   It is disgraceful to love another man's wife at all, or one's own too
   much. A wise man ought to love his wife with judgment, not with
   passion. Let a man govern his voluptuous impulses, and not rush
   headlong into intercourse. There is nothing blacker than to love a wife
   as if she were an adulteress. Men who say they have contracted marriage
   and are bringing up children, for the good of their country and of the
   race, should at least imitate the brutes, and not destroy their
   offspring in the womb; nor should they appear in the character of
   lovers, but of husbands. In some cases marriage has grown out of
   adultery: and, shameful to relate! men have tried to teach their wives
   chastity after having taken their chastity away. Marriages of that sort
   are quickly dissolved when lust is satiated. The first allurement gone,
   the charm is lost. What shall I say, says Seneca, of the poor men who
   in numbers are bribed to take the name of husband in order to evade the
   laws promulgated against bachelors? How can he who is married under
   such conditions be a guide to morality, teach chastity, and maintain
   the authority of a husband? It is the saying of a very learned man,
   that chastity must be preserved at all costs, and that when it is lost
   all virtue falls to the ground. This holds the primacy of all virtues
   in woman. This it is that makes up for a wife's poverty, enhances her
   riches, redeems her deformity, gives grace to her beauty; it makes her
   act in a way worthy of her forefathers whose blood it does not taint
   with bastard offspring; of her children, who through it have no need to
   blush for their mother, or to be in doubt about their father; and above
   all, of herself, since it defends her from external violation. There is
   no greater calamity connected with captivity than to be the victim of
   another's lust. The consulship sheds lustre upon men; eloquence gives
   eternal renown; military glory and a triumph immortalise an obscure
   family. Many are the spheres ennobled by splendid ability. The virtue
   of woman is, in a special sense, purity. It was this that made [4640]
   Lucretia the equal of Brutus, if it did not make her his superior,
   since Brutus learnt from a woman the impossibility of being a slave. It
   was this that made [4641] Cornelia a fit match for Gracchus, and [4642]
   Porcia for a second Brutus. [4643] Tanaquil is better known than her
   husband. His name, like the names of many other kings, is lost in the
   mists of antiquity. She, through a virtue rare among women, is too
   deeply rooted in the hearts of all ages for her memory ever to perish.
   Let my married sisters copy the examples of [4644] Theano, [4645]
   Cleobuline, Gorgente, [4646] Timoclia, the [4647] Claudias and
   Cornelias; and when they find the Apostle conceding second marriage to
   depraved women, they will read that before the light of our religion
   shone upon the world wives of one husband ever held high rank among
   matrons, that by their hands the sacred rites of Fortuna [4648]
   Muliebris were performed, that a priest or [4649] Flamen twice [4650]
   married was unknown, that the high-priests of Athens to this day [4651]
   emasculate themselves by drinking hemlock, and once they have been
   drawn in to the pontificate, cease to be men.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4254] From this expression and that quoted in the notice above, it
   would be supposed that Jerome knew Jovinianus and his mode of life. But
   there is no reason to think that he had this knowledge; and his
   imputations against his adversary must be taken as the inferences which
   he draws from his opinions.

   [4255] Hor. Ars Poet. 139.

   [4256] Pers. Sat. iii. 118.

   [4257] Plautus, Pseudolus, i. 1. 23. Has quidem, pol, credo, nisi
   Sibylla legerit, Interpretari alium potesse neminem.

   [4258] The allusion is probably to the Sybilline books.

   [4259] Æn x. 640.

   [4260] The philosopher of Ephesus. Flourished about b.c. 513.

   [4261] Ibi est distinctio. Instead of clearness we have to make a
   choice between possible meanings.

   [4262] Marcion lived about a.d. 150, and was co-temporary with
   Polycarp, who is said to have had a personal encounter with him at
   Rome. Unlike other Gnostics he professed to be purely Christian in his
   doctrines. He is specially noted for his violent treatment of
   Scripture: he rejected the whole of the Old Testament, while of the New
   he acknowledged only the Gospel of S. Luke and ten of S. Paul's
   Epistles, and from these he expunged whatever he did not approve of.
   His sect lasted until the sixth century.

   [4263] By birth an Assyrian, and a pupil of Justin Martyr. His
   followers were called Encratites, or Temperates, from their great
   austerity. They also bore the names Water-drinkers and Renouncers.

   [4264] Heb. xiii. The Revised Ver. translates "let marriage be, etc."
   There is no verb in the original, the sentence being probably designed
   to be a Christian proverb, and capable of serving either as an
   assertion or as a precept. The revised rendering is preferred by the
   chief modern commentators.

   [4265] Gen. i. 28.

   [4266] For much interesting information relating to counting on the
   fingers, and for authorities on the subject, see Mayor's note on
   Juvenal x. 249.

   [4267] The philosopher of Crotona, in Italy, b.c. 580-510. See some of
   his sayings in Jerome's Apology, iii. 39-40.

   [4268] The great teacher of the Academy at Athens; lived b.c. 428-389.

   [4269] Surnamed the "Just." He was the opponent of Themistocles. He
   fought at Marathon (490), and although in exile did good service at
   Salamis (480). He was now recalled, and after commanding the Athenians
   at Platæa (479) died, probably in 468, so poor that he did not leave
   enough to pay for his funeral.

   [4270] Flourished about b.c. 370. A disciple of Socrates, and founder
   of the Cyrenaic School of Philosophy; he was luxurious in his life, and
   held pleasure to be the highest good.

   [4271] Epicurus (b.c. 342-270), though a disciple of Aristippus, does
   not appear to have deserved the odium attached to his name by Jerome
   and many others. "Pleasure with him was not a mere momentary and
   transitory sensation, but something lasting and imperishable,
   consisting in pure and noble enjoyments, that is, in ataraxia and
   aponia, or the freedom from pain and from all influences which disturb
   the peace of our mind, and thereby our happiness which is the result of
   it." See Zeller's Socrates and the Socratic Schools (Reichel's
   translation), second ed., p. 337 sq.

   [4272] The famous Athenian, talented, reckless and unscrupulous; born
   about b.c. 450, assassinated 404.

   [4273] Gen. ii. 24.

   [4274] Matt. xix. 5.

   [4275] Gen. i. 28; ix. 1.

   [4276] Gen. ix. 1.

   [4277] Gen. ix. 3.

   [4278] Gen. xxv. 23.

   [4279] Gen. xxx. 1.

   [4280] Gen. xxx. 2.

   [4281] Palo. Rev. Vers. tent-pin.

   [4282] Ps. lxxii. 1.

   [4283] Ps. lxxii. 15.

   [4284] Is. xxxviii. 19. Sept.

   [4285] 1 Tim. v. 14.

   [4286] Hebr. xiii. 4. See note on sec. 3.

   [4287] 1 Cor. vii. 39.

   [4288] 1 Tim. ii. 14.

   [4289] 1 Cor. vii. 29.

   [4290] 1 Cor. vii. 1 sq.

   [4291] Prov. vi. 27, 28.

   [4292] Mithras was the God of the Sun among the Persians. His worship
   was introduced at Rome under the Emperors, and thence spread over the
   empire.

   [4293] Son of Vulcan, king of Athens, and the first to drive a
   four-in-hand, Virg. G. iii. 113: "First to the chariot, Ericthonius
   dared four steeds to join, and o'er the rapid wheels victorious hang."

   [4294] 1 Pet. iii. 7.

   [4295] 1 Pet. iii. 2, 3.

   [4296] 1 John ii. 6.

   [4297] 1 Cor. vii. 7.

   [4298] 2 Cor. ii. 7.

   [4299] 2 Cor. ii. 7.

   [4300] 2 Cor. ii. 10. Margin.

   [4301] Ps. xlv. 9, 13, 14.

   [4302] 1 Peter iii. 7, joined with 1 Peter iv. 10.

   [4303] 1 Cor. vii. 8.

   [4304] Tit. i. 12.

   [4305] 1 Cor. xv. 33.

   [4306] Acts xvii. 28.

   [4307] 1 Cor. vii. 10 sq.

   [4308] 2 Cor. vi. 14 sq.

   [4309] 1 Cor. vii. 39.

   [4310] Mal. ii. 11, 12.

   [4311] R.V. "To the man that doeth this, him that waketh and him that
   answereth."

   [4312] 1 Cor. vii. 18 sq.

   [4313] But S. Paul hints at a surgical operation. See Josephus, Antiq.
   Bk. xii. c. v. sec. 1, where certain apostates from Judaism are said
   "to have hid their circumcision that even when they were naked [in the
   gymnasium] they might appear to be Greeks." See also Celsus, Bk. vii.
   c. xxv.

   [4314] Gal. v. 19.

   [4315] 1 Cor. vi. 17.

   [4316] 1 Cor. vii. 25, 26.

   [4317] Ferias nuptiarum. The reference is to 1 Cor. vii. 5.

   [4318] Matt. xix. 10 sq.

   [4319] Jerome uses the Greek word agonothetes --President of the Games.

   [4320] S. John vii. 37.

   [4321] Is. lvi. 3.

   [4322] Jer. xxxviii. 7.

   [4323] Acts viii. 27.

   [4324] 1 Cor. vii. 26.

   [4325] Matt. xxiv. 19, &c.

   [4326] 1 Cor. vii. 27.

   [4327] 1 Cor. vii. 30 sqq.

   [4328] See Rev. Ver. Margin.

   [4329] See the treatise on the Perp. Virginity of the Blessed Virgin
   Mary. Rome, 384.

   [4330] Ep. xxii. on the guarding of virginity. Rome, 384.

   [4331] Jerome apparently, here, alludes to some early work of
   Tertullian not now extant.

   [4332] Jerome often alludes to his relation to Gregory, in the year
   381; he was present at the council of Constantinople, of which Gregory
   was then the bishop.

   [4333] This rendering supposes kai memeristai to be joined to the
   preceding sentence. The Vulgate has et divisus est, and so also the
   Æthiopic Version.

   [4334] S. John xv. 19.

   [4335] 1 Cor. vii. 35.

   [4336] 1 Cor. iii. 10.

   [4337] 1 Cor. vii. 37, 38.

   [4338] Ps. xxxvi. 27.

   [4339] Eccles. vii. 16.

   [4340] 1 Cor. vii. 39, 40.

   [4341] 1 Tim. v. 11, 15.

   [4342] 1 Cor. vii. 40.

   [4343] Rom vii. 2, 3.

   [4344] 1 Tim. v. 14, 15.

   [4345] See 1 Tim. iii. 12. Most ancient writers interpreted S. Paul's
   words as referring to second marriages after loss of first wife,
   however happening. And certain Councils decided in the same sense, e.g.
   Neocæsarea (a.d. 314). Ellicott's Pastoral Ep., fifth ed., p. 41.

   [4346] 1 Tim. v. 9. Other authorities, however, suppose the words to
   refer to an order of widows, and pertinently ask, would the Church thus
   limit her alms.

   [4347] 1 Cor. vi. 12.

   [4348] Eph. v. 31; Gen. ii.

   [4349] Eph. v. 32.

   [4350] Eph. v. 25; Col. iii. 9-11.

   [4351] 1 Thess. iv. 7.

   [4352] Lit. through a virgin. The allusion is, probably, to his baptism
   by a virgin, i.e., John Baptist.

   [4353] But see Gen. iv. 26.

   [4354] 1 Pet. iii. 20.

   [4355] Eph. i. 10.

   [4356] Rev. i. 8; xxii. 13.

   [4357] Rom. xiv. 21.

   [4358] Gen. xxxi. 46-49, where the heap itself is called Galeed.

   [4359] Gen. xxxii. 25, 28, 31.

   [4360] Gen. xxxv. 16, 20.

   [4361] Gen. xxxviii.

   [4362] Gen. xxxviii. 9.

   [4363] Ex. iv. 24-26.

   [4364] Ex. iii. 5.

   [4365] 1 Sam. xxi. 4.

   [4366] Levit. xxi. 13, 14.

   [4367] The reference is, probably, to Levit. xxii. 13. But the second
   marriage is not there prohibited, and in the ideal polity of Ezekiel
   (xliv. 22) a priest might marry the widow of a priest.

   [4368] Levit. xxi. 3.

   [4369] Deut. xx. 6, 7, where an indulgence, not a prohibition, is
   clearly indicated.

   [4370] Ex. xxxviii. 8. Sept. Vulg. "who watched;" Onkelos' Targum "who
   assembled to pray," and so the Syriac Version. The Hebrew word
   signifies "to go forth to war," but is applied to the temple service, a
   sort of militia sacra (Gesenius). Hence Rev. Version, "the serving
   women which served at the door of the tent of meeting;" and Margin,
   "the women which assembled to minister." Comp. Numb. iv. 3, 23, 30, 35,
   39; and 1 Sam. ii. 22.

   [4371] Ex. xxxvii.

   [4372] In Jude 5, instead of "the Lord," A. B. read Jesus, and this is
   accepted by many ancient, authorities. Farrar observes ("Early Days of
   Christianity," pop. ed., p, 128) "Jesus" is the more difficult, and
   therefore more probable reading of A. B. It is explained by 1 Cor. x.
   4, and the identification of the Messiah with the "Angel of the Lord"
   (Ex. xiv. 19; xxiii. 20, &c.) and with the Pillar of Fire in Philo.

   [4373] Josh. iii.

   [4374] Jerome derives Gilgal from nlh to uncover: the accepted
   derivation is from nll to roll.

   [4375] Ex. iii. 5; Jos. v. 15.

   [4376] Josh. x. 3.

   [4377] Josh. x. 16.

   [4378] S. Luke xvi. 29.

   [4379] Rom. v. 14.

   [4380] Gen. xxxi. 41.

   [4381] Gen. xxxvii. 28.

   [4382] Gen. xxxii. 14.

   [4383] Joshua died at the age of 110 years. Josh. xxiv. 29.

   [4384] Timnath-Serah was the original name of Joshua's inheritance
   (Josh. xix. 50), but in Judges ii. 9, we find the name changed to
   Timnath-Heres. Timnath-Serah and the tomb of its illustrious owner were
   shown in the time of Jerome (Letter cviii. 13). "Paula wondered greatly
   that he who assigned men their possessions had chosen for himself a
   rough and rocky spot." Jerome is looking at the inheritance with the
   eyes of an ardent controversialist when he describes it as "the fairest
   spot in the land of Judah."

   [4385] Ps. xlviii. 2. The correct rendering of the Hebrew is much
   disputed.

   [4386] Ps. lxxiii. 2.

   [4387] Josh. xxiv. 28.

   [4388] Deut. xxxiv. 6.

   [4389] Worshipped more especially at Lampsacus on the Hellespont. He
   was regarded as the promoter of fertility in vegetables and animals.

   [4390] Ps. cxxviii. 3.

   [4391] Gen. vi. 3. R.V. Strive or rule in.

   [4392] Gen. xlix. 17. Samson was of the tribe of Dan.

   [4393] Judg. xi. 30, 31.

   [4394] 1 Tim. iii. 2.

   [4395] Ps. xcix. 6.

   [4396] See 1 Chron. vi. 34-38.

   [4397] Heb. vii. 3. The Greek word in the text ("without genealogy") is
   unknown to secular writers, and occurs here only in the New Test. It
   cannot mean without descent (see verse 6). Unmarried appears to be a
   false inference from this supposed meaning. Ignatius also (Ep. ad.
   Philad.) reckoned Melchizedek among celibates. Rev. Version translates,
   "without genealogy," i.e., his ancestry was unrecorded. See Farrar's
   "Early Days of Christianity," pop. ed., p. 221.

   [4398] 1 Sam. ii. 22.

   [4399] See, however, 1 Chron. xxii. 8.

   [4400] S. Matt. xviii. 6.

   [4401] S. Matt. v. 22.

   [4402] S. Matt. v. 27.

   [4403] Cant. vi. 8.

   [4404] 1 Kings xi. 3.

   [4405] 1 Cor. vii. 29.

   [4406] Is. xxxviii. 19.

   [4407] 2 Kings xxii. 14.

   [4408] 2 Kings xx. 18.

   [4409] Dan. i. 3, 4.

   [4410] Ezek. xiv. 14, 20.

   [4411] Ezek. xviii. 4.

   [4412] Ezek. viii. 1.

   [4413] Ezek. xiv. 14.

   [4414] Apocryphal additions to Daniel.

   [4415] Matt. xix. 27.

   [4416] Luke xviii. 29, 30.

   [4417] 1 Cor. ix. 5. The text has been much tampered with by the
   advocates or opponents of celibacy. The reading first quoted by Jerome
   is that of F, a manuscript of the eighth or ninth century, and is found
   in Tertullian; the other chief readings introduce the Greek equivalent
   for sister, either in the sing. or plural. The Rev. Version renders,
   "have we no right to lead about a wife that is a believer" (or sister).
   Augustine, Tertullian, Theodoret, &c., together with Cornelius-a-Lapide
   and Estius among the moderns, agree with Jerome in referring the
   passage to holy women who ministered to the Apostles as they did to the
   Lord Himself. The third canon of Nicæa is supposed to be directed
   against the practice encouraged by this interpretation of the Apostle's
   words.

   [4418] Attributed to Clement by Jerome.

   [4419] Isa. i. 9.

   [4420] S. John xiii. 25.

   [4421] S. John xx. 4.

   [4422] S. John xxi. 7 sq.

   [4423] S. Matt. xvi. 18.

   [4424] S. Matt. xviii. 18: S. John xx. 22, 23.

   [4425] S. John xiv. 27.

   [4426] S. Matt. xx. 27: S. Luke xxii. 26.

   [4427] See this book in Vol. III. of this series.

   [4428] Is. xl. 3.

   [4429] S. John i. 1.

   [4430] S. John xix. 26, 27.

   [4431] 1 Tim. ii. 13, 15.

   [4432] 1 Tim. ii. 8 sqq.

   [4433] Apparently, Eve's transgression imputed to her descendants.

   [4434] The original admits of the rendering "by means of her
   child-bearing." But Ellicott and others interpret of the Incarnation.

   [4435] Rev. Version, "sobriety." Sobermindedness or discretion are
   given by Ellicott (Notes on translation) as alternative renderings. The
   word cannot mean chastity, but rather "the well-balanced state of mind
   resulting from habitual self-restraint" in general.

   [4436] Prov. vi. 26?

   [4437] Prov. vii. 27; ix. 18.

   [4438] Prov. xxi. 19.

   [4439] Often mentioned by Seneca. A saying is reported of him: "Ho,
   traveller, stop. There is a miracle here: a man and his wife not at
   strife."

   [4440] Prov. xxi. 9; xxv. 24.

   [4441] Prov. xxvii. 15.

   [4442] Supereffluas. Prov. iii. 21 Sept., Heb. ii. 1. The Greek word
   signifies to fall away like flowing water. See Schleusner on
   pararruomai . In Heb. ii. 1, Rev. V. translates "We drift away:"
   Vaughan, "We be found to have leaked, or ebbed away."

   [4443] Prov. xxx. 15, 16.

   [4444] Eccles. iii. 1, 2, sqq.

   [4445] Eccles. vii. 10.

   [4446] R.V. "Good as an inheritance."

   [4447] Eccles. vii. 28, 29.

   [4448] Eccles. ix. 8.

   [4449] Cant. i. 10, 11. "Plaits of gold with studs of silver." R.V.

   [4450] Cant. ii. 1, 10-12.

   [4451] 1 Cor. vii. 29.

   [4452] Cant. ii. 12.

   [4453] Verse 13.

   [4454] 2 Cor. ii. 15.

   [4455] Cant. ii. 13, 14.

   [4456] Ex. xxxiv. 33, 35; 2 Cor. iii. 7 sq.

   [4457] Is. i. 15.

   [4458] Cant. ii. 16.

   [4459] Cant. iii. 7, 8.

   [4460] Cant. iv. 6.

   [4461] Eph. v. 27.

   [4462] Cant. iv. 8.

   [4463] Sept. R.V. "Look from the top of Amana."

   [4464] Cant. viii. 5.

   [4465] Ps. cxix. 105.

   [4466] Cant. iv. 9.

   [4467] Cant. iv. 9, 10.

   [4468] Cant. v. 1.

   [4469] S. Matt. ix. 17.

   [4470] Rom. vii. 6.

   [4471] Zech. viii. 5; ix. 17, R.V. "How great is his goodness, and how
   great is his beauty! Corn shall make the young men flourish, and new
   wine the maids."

   [4472] Ps. xlv. 16, 17.

   [4473] Cant. iv. 12, 13.

   [4474] Cant. v. 10.

   [4475] Cant. v. 16.

   [4476] Cant. vii. 1.

   [4477] R.V. "O Prince's daughter!" Sept., also "daughter of Nadab."

   [4478] Is. vii. 14.

   [4479] Delitzsch remarks, "The assertion of Jerome is untenable." See
   Cheyne, critical note on Is. vii. 14. The word probably denotes a
   female, married or unmarried, just attaining maturity. But in every
   other passage, the context shows that the word is used of an unmarried
   woman.

   [4480] Gen. xxiv. 42 sq.

   [4481] Is. xxxvii. 22.

   [4482] Is. liv. 1.

   [4483] Jerem. ii. 32.

   [4484] Jer. xxxi. 22.

   [4485] Jer. i. 5.

   [4486] Jer. xxxix. 11; xl. i.

   [4487] Ezek. i. 4.

   [4488] Ezek. xxiv. 18.

   [4489] 1 Cor. vii. 25.

   [4490] Acts xv. 28, 29.

   [4491] S. Matt. x. 10: S. Luke x. 5.

   [4492] S. Matt. xix. 21.

   [4493] 1 Tim. iii. 2, 4; Tit. i. 6.

   [4494] Sacerdotes: that is, bishops.

   [4495] 1 Cor. vii. 7.

   [4496] 1 Tim. iii. 1.

   [4497] V. supra, c. 27. R.V. "temperate." Ellicott observes, "under any
   circumstances the derivative translation Vigilant, Auth., though
   possibly defensible in the verb, is a needless and doubtful extension
   of the primary meaning."

   [4498] R.V. "orderly." V. above, c. 27.

   [4499] kosmion. R.V. "orderly."

   [4500] Non vinolentum. R.V. "no brawler," i.e., as the Margin explains,
   "not quarrelsome over wine." The original is not thus a mere synonym
   for nephalios in v. 2.

   [4501] So Chrysostom and Theodoret. The simple meaning appears to suit
   the context better.

   [4502] 1 Sam. ii. and iv.

   [4503] 1 Tim. iii. 11.

   [4504] The Code of Constantine, following the Mosaic law, imposed the
   penalty of death for adultery. See Gibbon, ch. xliv.

   [4505] S. Matt. xix. 12.

   [4506] 1 Cor. vii. 25.

   [4507] Two rocky islands in the Euxine, that, according to the fable,
   floated about, dashing against and rebounding from each other, until at
   length they became fixed on the passage of the Argo between them."

   [4508] Andabatæ.

   [4509] Matt. xix. 12.

   [4510] 1 Cor. vii. 7.

   [4511] Phil. ii. 6-8.

   [4512] S. John xx. 20.

   [4513] S. John xx. 19.

   [4514] S. Matt. xiv. 28.

   [4515] S. Matt. xxii. 30.

   [4516] 2 Cor. v. 17.

   [4517] Rom. vi. 21, 22.

   [4518] Rom. vii. 4 sq.

   [4519] Rom. vii. 14, 24, 25.

   [4520] Rom. viii. 1, 2.

   [4521] Rom. viii. 5 sq.

   [4522] Rom. viii. 11, 14.

   [4523] R.V. "mind."

   [4524] Rom. xii. 1-3.

   [4525] See ch. 27.

   [4526] Rom. xiii. 11, 12, 14.

   [4527] 1 Cor. iii. 1, 2, 3.

   [4528] That is, under the dominion of the psyche, or principle of life
   common to man and the beasts, hence, natural. Opposed to the psyche is
   the pneuma, capable of being influenced by the Spirit of God. A man
   thus influenced is pneumatikos or spiritual. See also 1 Cor. xv. 44.

   [4529] 1 Cor. xv. 47 sq.

   [4530] 2 Cor. v. 1 sq.

   [4531] 2 Cor. xi. 2.

   [4532] Gal. ii. 16.

   [4533] Gal. iii. 3, 4.

   [4534] Gal. v. 16, 17.

   [4535] Properly, self-control in the wide sense.

   [4536] Gal. v. 24, 25.

   [4537] Gal. vi. 7, 8.

   [4538] Eph. ii. 3, 4.

   [4539] Eph. iv. 22.

   [4540] Eph. vi. 24.

   [4541] Phil. iii. 20, 21.

   [4542] Phil. iv. 8.

   [4543] Coloss. ii. 11; iii. 1 sq.

   [4544] 2 Tim. ii. 4.

   [4545] Titus ii. 11, 12.

   [4546] S. John xvi. 12, 13.

   [4547] xxi. 9.

   [4548] Matt. xi. 13.

   [4549] The passage is not found in existing copies of Josephus.

   [4550] S. James i. 16-18.

   [4551] R.V. "can be no variation." The word "difference," as used by
   Jerome, is explained by the context.

   [4552] Rev. i. 5.

   [4553] 1 Pet. i. 3-5.

   [4554] 1 Pet. i. 13-16.

   [4555] 1 Pet. i. 18, 19.

   [4556] 1 Pet. i. 22, 23.

   [4557] In Jerome's rendering living and abiding,' are attributes of
   God. But in the original the participles may be taken as predicates of
   either word or God. The R.V. refers them to the former.

   [4558] 1 Pet. ii. 9.

   [4559] 1 Pet. iv. 1 sq.

   [4560] 2 Pet. i. 4.

   [4561] 2 Pet. ii. 9 sq.

   [4562] 2 Pet. iii. 3.

   [4563] The notorious epicure of the time of Augustus and Tiberius.

   [4564] Paxamus wrote a treatise on cooking, which, Suidas states, was
   arranged in alphabetical order.

   [4565] 1 John ii. 15 sq.

   [4566] 1 John iii. 2, 3.

   [4567] 1 John iv. 7. R.V. "that we may have."

   [4568] Jude 23.

   [4569] xiv. 1 sq.

   [4570] Rev. vii. 5 sq.

   [4571] Apoc. xiv. 3, 4.

   [4572] or they may say.

   [4573] 2 Tim. ii. 20, 21.

   [4574] Virg. Æn i. 317.

   [4575] Virg. Æn. vii. 803: id. xi. 535.

   [4576] Leos was the hero from whom the tribe Leontis derived its name.
   Once when Athens was suffering from famine or plague, the oracle at
   Delphi demanded that his daughters should be sacrificed. The father
   complied. The shrine called Leocorium was erected by the Athenians to
   their honour.

   [4577] Jerome's memory appears to be at fault. When the Greek fleet was
   on its way to Troy, it was detained by a calm at Aulis. The seer
   Calchas advised that Iphigenia, daughter of Agamemnon should be
   sacrificed. See Dict. of Ant.

   [4578] According to the law of Numa, the punishment of a Vestal Virgin
   for violating the vow of chastity was stoning to death. Tarquinius
   Priscus first enacted that the offender should be buried alive, after
   being stripped of her badges of office, scourged and attired like a
   corpse. "From the time of the triumvirs each [Vestal] was preceded by a
   lictor when she went abroad; consuls and prætors made way for them, and
   lowered their fasces; even the tribunes of the plebs respected their
   holy character, and if any one passed under their litter, he was put to
   death."

   [4579] It is said, however, that Claudia (Quinta) was a Roman matron,
   not a Vestal Virgin. The soothsayers announced that only a chaste woman
   could move the vessel referred to. Claudia, who had been accused of
   incontinency, took hold of the rope, and the vessel forthwith followed
   her. b.c. 204.

   [4580] Seneca.

   [4581] In the year after the death of Alexander (b.c. 323), Leosthenes
   defeated Alexander's general Antipater, near Thermopylæ. Antipater then
   threw himself into the town of Lamia (in Phthiotis in Thessaly) which
   thus gave its name to the war. Leosthenes pressed the siege with great
   vigour, but was killed by a blow from a stone.

   [4582] Another name for Messana (or Messene), derived from the
   Mamertini, a people of Campania, some of whom were mercenaries in the
   army of the tyrant Agathocles, and were quartered in the town. At his
   death (b.c. 282) they rose and gained possession of it.

   [4583] The semi-legendary hero of the second war between Sparta and
   Messene. He lived about b.c. 270.

   [4584] The spring festival held in honour of Hyacinthus, the beautiful
   youth accidentally slain by Apollo, and from whose blood was said to
   have sprung the flower of the same name.

   [4585] He succeeded Plato as president of the Academy (b.c. 347-339).
   His works are all lost.

   [4586] One of Aristotle's pupils, and author of a number of works, none
   of which are extant.

   [4587] Diogenes Laërtius (so named from Laërte in Cilicia), who
   probably lived in the 2nd century after Christ, in the Third Book of
   his "Lives of the Philosophers" refers to a treatise by Anaxelides on
   the same subject. It has therefore been conjectured that Jerome may
   have written Philosophica Historia for philosophiae.

   [4588] Timæus of Locri, in Italy, a Pythagorean philosopher, is said to
   have been a teacher of Plato. There is an extant work bearing his name;
   but its genuineness is considered doubtful, and it is in all
   probability only an abridgment of Plato's dialogue of Timæus.

   [4589] Damo. Pythagoras is said to have entrusted his writings to her,
   and to have forbidden her to give them to any one. She strictly
   observed the command, although she was in extreme poverty, and received
   many requests to sell them. According to some accounts Pythagoras had
   another daughter, Myia.

   [4590] Flourished about b.c. 540-510.

   [4591] Clement of Alexandria (died about a.d. 220) in his Stromata
   (i.e. literally, patchwork) or Miscellanies, Bk. iv., relates the same
   story and gives the names of the daughters. The Diodorus referred to in
   the text lived at Alexandria in the reign of Ptolemy Sorer (b.c.
   323-285), by whom he was said to have been surnamed Cronos or Saturn,
   on account of his inability to solve at once some dialectic problem
   when dining with the king, perhaps with a play upon the word chronos
   (time), or with a sarcastic allusion to Cronos as the introducer of the
   arts of civilized life. The philosopher is said to have taken the
   disgrace so much to heart, that he wrote a treatise on the problem, and
   then died in despair. Another account derives his name from his teacher
   Apollonius Cronus.

   [4592] Born about b.c. 213, died b.c. 129. He was the determined
   opponent of the Stoics, and maintained that neither our senses nor our
   understanding gives us a safe criterion of truth.

   [4593] The poetical name of Rhea Silvia, daughter of Numitor and mother
   of Romulus and Remus.

   [4594] According to the legend she stabbed herself on the funeral pyre.
   Jerome ignores the modifications introduced into the legend by Virgil,
   who, in defiance of the common chronology, makes Dido a contemporary of
   Æneas, and represents her as destroying herself when forsaken by the
   hero.

   [4595] Hasdrubal and his family, with 900 deserters and desperadoes,
   retired into the temple of Æsculapius, as if to make a brave defence.
   But the commandant's heart failed him; and, slipping out alone, he
   threw himself at the feet of Scipio, and craved for pardon. His wife,
   standing on the base of the temple, was near enough to witness the
   sight, and reproaching her husband with cowardice, cast herself with
   her children into the flames which were now wrapping the Citadel round
   on all sides. b.c. 146.

   [4596] Son of Nicias the celebrated Athenian general.

   [4597] She succeeded Mausolus and reigned b.c. 352-350.

   [4598] She was the wife of Agron, and assumed the sovereign power on
   the death of her husband, b.c. 231. War was declared against her by
   Rome in consequence of her having caused the assassination of an
   ambassador, and in 228 she obtained peace at the cost of the greater
   part of her dominions.

   [4599] Cyropædeia, Book vii.

   [4600] The wife of Candaules, also called Myrsilus. She was exhibited
   to Gyges, who, after the murder of her husband, married her. Herod. B.
   i.

   [4601] The story, as is well known, formed the subject of the play by
   Euripides bearing the heroine's name, which was brought out about b.c.
   438.

   [4602] Protesilaus was the first of the Greeks to fall at Troy.
   According to some accounts he was slain by Hector. When her husband was
   slain Laodamia begged the gods to allow her to converse with him for
   only 3 hours. The request having been granted, Hermes led Protesilaus
   back to the upper world, and when he died a second time, Laodamia died
   with him.

   [4603] The wife of L. Tarquinius Collatinus, whose rape by Sextus led
   to the dethronement of Tarquinius Superbus and the establishment of the
   republic.

   [4604] Over the Carthaginian fleet near Mylæ, 260 b.c.

   [4605] One of the assassins of Julius Cæsar. Jerome appears to be at
   fault here. Porcia, the daughter of Cato by his first wife Atilia,
   before marrying Brutus in 45 b.c., had been married to M. Bibulus and
   had borne him three children. He died in 48. After the death of Brutus
   in 42 she put an end to her own life, probably by the fumes of a
   charcoal fire.

   [4606] Marcia is related to have been ceded by Cato to his friend
   Hortensius. She continued to live with the latter until his death, when
   she returned to Cato.

   [4607] It has been conjectured that instead of "Marcia, Cato's younger
   daughter," a few lines above, we should read Porcia.

   [4608] Probably the daughter of Cato by his second wife Marcia.

   [4609] Jerome, apparently, makes a mistake here. Valeria, sister of the
   Messalas, married Sulla towards the end of his life. Valeria, the widow
   of Galerius, after the death of her husband in 311, rejected the
   proposals of Maximinus. Her consequent sufferings are related by Gibbon
   in his fourteenth chapter.

   [4610] The Greek philosopher to whom Aristotle bequeathed his library
   and the originals of his own writings. He died b.c. 287, after being
   President of the Academy for 35 years. If he were the author of the
   book here referred to, it is not to be found among his extant writings.

   [4611] Cicero at the beginning of the third book of the De Officiis,
   makes Cato quote this saying as one frequently in the mouth of Publius
   Scipio.

   [4612] Phil. i. 23.

   [4613] We hear very little of the two sons of Moses, Gershom and
   Eliezer. See Ex. iv. 20, xviii. 3, 1 Chron. xxiii. 14. Their promotion
   is nowhere recorded, and Moses appointed a person of another tribe to
   be his successor.

   [4614] See 1 Sam. viii. 1-4 and ch. ix.

   [4615] b.c. 46. "What grounds for displeasure she had given him besides
   her alleged extravagance it is hard to say. His letters to her during
   the previous year had been short and rather cold." Watson, Select
   Letters of Cicero, third ed. p. 397.

   [4616] Hirtius was the friend personal and political of Julius Cæsar,
   and during Cæsar's absence in Africa he lived principally at his
   Tusculan estate which adjoined Cicero's villa. Hirtius and Cicero
   though opposed to each other in politics were on good terms, and the
   former is said to have received lessons in oratory from the latter.

   [4617] But not long after divorcing Terentia he married Publilia, a
   young girl of whose property he had the management, in order to relieve
   himself from pecuniary difficulties. She seems to have received little
   affection from her husband. Watson, p. 397.

   [4618] This statement is without authority. See Long's Article on
   Sallust in Smith's Dict. of Classical Biography.

   [4619] Cæcilia Metella, the third of Sulla's five wives, had previously
   been married to M. Æmilius Scaurus, consul b.c. 115. She fell ill
   during the celebration of Sulla's triumph on account of his victory
   over Mithridates in 81; and as her recovery was hopeless, Sulla for
   religious reasons divorced her. She soon afterwards died, and Sulla
   honoured her memory with a splendid funeral.

   [4620] The famous dictator claimed the name Felix for himself in a
   speech which he delivered to the people at the close of the celebration
   of his triumph, because he attributed his success in life to the favour
   of the gods.

   [4621] But Sulla's youth and manhood were disgraced by the most sensual
   vices. He was indebted for a considerable portion of his wealth to a
   courtesan Nicopolis, and his death in b.c. 78 at the age of 60 was
   hastened by his dissolute mode of life.

   [4622] Pompey, like Sulla, was married five times. Mucia, his third
   wife, daughter of Q. Mucius Scævola, the augur, consul b.c. 95, was
   divorced by Pompey in 62, and afterwards married M. Æmilius Scaurus,
   son of the consul by Cæcilia and thus stepson of Sulla.

   [4623] Born b.c. 234, died b.c. 149. He was the great-grandfather of
   Cato of Utica.

   [4624] b.c. 382-336.

   [4625] b.c. 385-322.

   [4626] Born about b.c. 480 at Leontini in Sicily. He is said to have
   lived 105, or even 109 years. He was held in high esteem at Athens,
   where he had numerous distinguished pupils and imitators.

   [4627] An Athenian tragic poet, celebrated for his wit.

   [4628] See the Andromache.

   [4629] There were two cities of this name, Leptis Magna and Parva, in
   N. Africa.

   [4630] Or "on another day," that is, than the marriage day implied in
   the context.

   [4631] Terence, Hecyra II. i. 4.

   [4632] Bk. I. ch. 8. "Candaules addressed Gyges as follows: Gyges, as I
   think you do not believe me when I speak of my wife's beauty (for the
   ears of men are naturally more incredulous than their eyes), you must
   contrive to see her naked.' But he, exclaiming loudly, answered: Sire,
   what a shocking proposal do you make, bidding me behold my queen naked!
   With her clothes a woman puts off her modesty,'" etc.

   [4633] Perhaps Terence, Phormio I. iii. 21.

   [4634] For these legends, see Classical Dict.

   [4635] The most distinguished disciple and the intimate friend of
   Epicurus. His philosophy appears to have been of a more sensual kind
   than that of his master. He made perfect happiness to consist in having
   a well-constituted body. He died b.c. 277 in the 53rd year of his age,
   7 years before Epicurus.

   [4636] Chrysippus (b.c. 280-207) the Stoic philosopher, born at Soli in
   Cilicia. He opposed the prevailing scepticism and maintained the
   possibility of attaining certain knowledge. It was said of him "that if
   Chrysippus had not existed the Porch (i.e., Stoicism) could not have
   been." He is reported to have seldom written less than 500 lines a-day,
   and to have left behind him 705 works.

   [4637] That is Zeus, regarded as presiding over marriages and the
   tutelary god of races or families.

   [4638] Literally, "Jupiter who causes to stand": hence Jerome's play
   upon the word. Jupiter Stator was the god regarded as supporting,
   preserving, etc. Cic., Cat. I. 13, 31--"quem (sc. Jovem) statorem hujus
   urbis atque imperii vere nominamus."

   [4639] The greater number of manuscripts read Sextus, an alternative
   name for the same person. Jerome in his version of the Chronicon of
   Eusebius speaks of "Xystus a Pythagorean philosopher" who flourished at
   the time of Christ's birth; but there is great difficulty in
   establishing the identity of the author of the "Sentences." See also
   the Prolegomena to Rufinus who translated the Sentences of Xystus, in
   Vol. III. of this Series.

   [4640] See note above, p. 382.

   [4641] Daughter of P. Scipio Africanus, and wife of Ti. Sempronius
   Gracchus, censor b.c. 169. The people erected a statue to her with the
   inscription "Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi."

   [4642] See note p. 376.

   [4643] Wife of Tarquinius Priscus.

   [4644] Theano was the most celebrated of the female philosophers of the
   Pythagorean school. According to some authorities she was the wife of
   Pythagoras.

   [4645] Cleobuline, or Cleobule, was celebrated for her riddles in
   hexameter verse. One on the subject of the year runs thus--"A father
   has 12 children, and each of these 30 daughters, on one side white, and
   on the other side black, and though immortal they all die."

   [4646] Timoclia was a woman of Thebes, whose house at the capture of
   the city in b.c. 335 was broken into and pillaged by the soldiery. She
   was herself violated by the commander, whom she afterwards contrived to
   push into a well.

   [4647] A vestal virgin who proved her innocence of the unchastity
   imputed to her by setting free a stranded ship with her girdle.

   [4648] The epithet is said to have been given to the goddess at the
   time when Coriolanus was prevented by the entreaties of the women from
   destroying Rome.

   [4649] The name for any Roman priest devoted to the service of one
   particular god. He took his distinguishing title from the deity to whom
   he ministered, e.g. Flamen Martialis.

   [4650] Comp. Tertullian De Monogamia, last chapter--"Fortunæ, inquit,
   muliebri coronam non imponit, nisi univira...Pontifex Maximus et
   Flaminica (the wife of a Flamen) nubunt semel."

   [4651] See Origen, Contra Celsum, Bk. VII. The water hemlock, or
   cowbane, is the variety referred to.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book II.

   Jerome answers the second, third, and fourth propositions of
   Jovinianus.

   I. (c. 1-4). That those who have become regenerate cannot be overthrown
   by the devil, Jerome (c. 1) puts it that they cannot be tempted by the
   devil. He quotes 1 John i. 8-ii. 2, as shewing that faithful men can be
   tempted and sin and need an advocate. The expressions (3) in Heb. vi.
   as to those who crucify the Son of God afresh do not apply to ordinary
   sins after baptism, as supposed by Montanus and Novatus. The epistles
   to the Seven Churches show that the lapsed may return. The Angels, and
   even our Lord Himself, (4) could be tempted.

   II. (c. 5-17). That there is no difference (morally) between one who
   fasts and one who takes food with thanksgiving. Jovinian has quoted (5)
   many texts of Scripture to show that God has made animals for men's
   food. But (6) there are many other uses of animals besides food. And
   there are many warnings like 1 Cor. vi. 13, as to the danger arising
   from food. There are among the heathen (7) many instances of
   abstinence. They recognize (8) the evil of sensual allurements, and
   often, like Crates the Theban, (9) have cast away what would tempt
   them; the senses, they teach, (10) should be subject to reason; and,
   that (11) except for athletes (Christians do not want to be like Milo
   of Crotona) bread and water suffice. Horace (12), Xenophon and other
   eminent Greeks (13), the Essenes and the Brahmans (14), as well as
   philosophers like Diogenes, testify to the value of abstinence. The Old
   Testament stories (15) of Esau's pottage, of the lusting of Israel for
   the flesh-pots of Egypt, and those in the New Testament of Anna,
   Cornelius, &c., commend abstinence. If some heretics inculcate fasting
   (16) in such a way as to despise the gifts of God, and weak Christians
   are not to be judged for their use of flesh, those who seek the higher
   life (17) will find a help in abstinence.

   III. (c. 18-34). The fourth proposition of Jovinianus, that all who are
   saved will have equal reward, is refuted (19) by the various yields of
   thirty, sixty, and a hundred fold in the parable of the sower, by (20)
   the "stars differing in glory" of 1 Cor. xv. 41. It is strange (21) to
   find the advocate of self-indulgence now claiming equality to the
   saints. But (22) as there were differences in Ezekiel between cattle
   and cattle, so in St. Paul between those who built gold or stubble on
   the one foundation. The differences of gifts (23), of punishments (24),
   of guilt (25), as in Pilate and the Chief Priests, of the produce of
   the good seed (26), of the mansions promised in heaven (27-29), of the
   judgment upon sins both in the church and in Scripture (30-31), of
   those called at different times to the vineyard (32) are arguments for
   the diversity of rewards. The parable of the talents (33) holds out as
   rewards differences of station, and so does the church (34) in its
   different orders.

   Jerome now recapitulates (35) and appeals (36)against the licentious
   views of Jovinianus, which have already induced many virgins to break
   their vows; and which, as the new Roman heresy (37), he calls upon the
   Imperial City (38) to reject.

   1. The second proposition of Jovinianus is that the baptized cannot be
   tempted [4652] by the devil. And to escape the imputation of folly in
   saying this, he adds: "But if any are tempted, it only shows that they
   were baptized with water, not with the Spirit, as we read was the case
   with Simon Magus." Hence it is that John says, [4653] "Whosoever is
   begotten of God doeth no sin, because his seed abideth in him: and he
   cannot sin, because he is begotten of God. In this the children of God
   are manifest, and the children of the Devil." And at the end of the
   Epistle, [4654] "Whosoever is begotten of God sinneth not; but his
   being begotten of God keepeth him, and the evil one toucheth him not."

   2. This would be a real difficulty and one for ever incapable of
   solution were it not solved by the witness of John himself, who
   immediately goes on to say, [4655] "My little children, guard
   yourselves from idols." If everyone that is born of God sinneth not,
   and cannot be tempted by the devil, how is it that he bids them beware
   of temptation? Again in the same Epistle we read: [4656] "If we say
   that we have no sins, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
   If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
   and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say that we have not
   sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us." I suppose that
   John was baptized and was writing to the baptized: I imagine too that
   all sin is of the devil. Now John confesses himself a sinner, and hopes
   for forgiveness of sins after baptism. My friend Jovinianus says,
   [4657] "Touch me not, for I am clean." What then? Does the Apostle
   contradict himself? By no means. In the same passage he gives his
   reason for thus speaking: [4658] "My little children, these things
   write I unto you, that ye may not sin. But if any man sin, we have an
   advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the
   propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the
   whole world. And hereby know we that we know him, if we keep his
   commandments. He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his
   commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. But whoso keepeth
   his word, in him verily hath the love of God been perfected. Hereby
   know we that we are in him: he that saith he abideth in him ought
   himself also to walk even as he walked." My reason for telling you,
   little children, that everyone who is born of God sinneth not, is that
   you may not sin, and that you may know that so long as you sin not you
   abide in the birth which God has given you. Yea, they who abide in that
   birth cannot sin. [4659] "For what communion hath light with darkness?
   Or Christ with Belial?" As day is distinct from night, so righteousness
   and unrighteousness, sin and good works, Christ and Antichrist cannot
   blend. If we give Christ a lodging-place in our hearts, we banish the
   devil from thence. If we sin and the devil enter through the gate of
   sin, Christ will immediately withdraw. Hence David after sinning says:
   [4660] "Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation," that is, the joy
   which he had lost by sinning. [4661] "He who saith, I know him, and
   keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him."
   Christ is called the truth: [4662] "I am the way, the truth, and the
   life." In vain do we make our boast in him whose commandments we keep
   not. To him that knoweth what is good, and doeth it not, it is sin.
   [4663] "As the body apart from the spirit is dead, even so faith apart
   from works is dead." And we must not think it a great matter to know
   the only God, when even devils believe and tremble. "He that saith he
   abideth in him ought himself also to walk even as he walked." Our
   opponent may choose whichever of the two he likes; we give him his
   choice. Does he abide in Christ, or not? If he abide, let him then walk
   as Christ walked. But if there is [4664] rashness in professing to copy
   the virtues of our Lord, he does not abide in Christ, for he does not
   walk as did Christ. [4665] "He did not sin, neither was guile found in
   his mouth: when he was reviled, he reviled not again, and as a lamb is
   dumb before its shearer, so opened he not his mouth." To Him came the
   prince of this world, and found nothing in Him: although He had done no
   sin, God made Him sin for us. But we, according to the Epistle of
   James, [4666] "all stumble in many things," and [4667] "no one is pure
   from sin, no not if his life be but a day long." [4668] For who will
   boast "that he has a clean heart? or who will be sure that he is pure
   from sin?" And we are held guilty after the similitude of Adam's
   transgression. Hence David says, [4669] "Behold, I was shapen in
   iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me." And the blessed Job,
   [4670] "Though I be righteous my mouth will speak wickedness, and
   though I be perfect, I shall be found perverse. If I wash myself with
   snow water and make my hands never so clean, yet wilt thou plunge me in
   the ditch and mine own clothes shall abhor me." But that we may not
   utterly despair and think that if we sin after baptism we cannot be
   saved, he immediately checks the tendency: [4671] "And if any man sin,
   we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he
   is the propitiation for our sins. And not for ours only, but also for
   the whole world." He addresses this to baptized believers, and he
   promises them the Lord as an advocate for their offences. He does not
   say: If you fall into sin, you have an advocate with the Father,
   Christ, and He is the propitiation for your sins: you might then say
   that he was addressing those whose baptism had been destitute of the
   true faith: but what he says is this, "We have an advocate with the
   Father, Jesus Christ, and he is the propitiation for our sins." And not
   only for the sins of John and his contemporaries, but for those of the
   whole world. Now in "the whole world" are included apostles and all the
   faithful, and a clear proof is established that sin after baptism is
   possible. It is useless for us to have an advocate Jesus Christ, if sin
   be impossible.

   3. The apostle Peter, to whom it was said, [4672] "He that is bathed
   needeth not to wash again," and [4673] "Thou art Peter, and upon this
   rock I will build my Church," through fear of a maid-servant denied
   Him. Our Lord himself says, [4674] "Simon, Simon, behold Satan asked to
   have you, that he might sift you as wheat. But I made supplication for
   thee, that thy faith fail not." And in the same place, "Watch and pray,
   that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but
   the flesh is weak." If you reply that this was said before the Passion,
   we certainly say after the Passion, in the Lord's prayer, [4675]
   "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors; and lead us not
   into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one." If we do not sin
   after baptism, why do we ask that we may be forgiven our sins, which
   were already forgiven in baptism? Why do we pray that we may not enter
   into temptation, and that we may be delivered from the evil one, if the
   devil cannot tempt those who are baptized? The case is different if
   this prayer belongs to the Catechumens, and is not adapted to faithful
   Christians. Paul, the chosen vessel, [4676] chastised his body, and
   brought it into subjection, lest after preaching to others he himself
   should be found a reprobate, and [4677] he tells that there was given
   to him "a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet" him. And
   to the Corinthians he writes: [4678] "I fear, lest by any means, as the
   serpent beguiled Eve in his craftiness, your minds should be corrupted
   from the simplicity that is toward Christ." And elsewhere: [4679] "But
   to whom ye forgive anything, I forgive also: for what I also have
   forgiven, if I have forgiven anything, for your sakes have I forgiven
   it in the person of Christ: that no advantage may be gained over us by
   Satan: for we are not ignorant of his devices." And again: [4680]
   "There hath no temptation taken you, but such as man can bear; but God
   is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
   able; but will with the temptation make also the way of escape, that ye
   may be able to endure it." And, [4681] "Let him that thinketh he
   standeth, take heed lest he fall." And to the Galatians: [4682] "Ye
   were running well; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the
   truth?" And elsewhere: [4683] "We would fain have come unto you, I Paul
   once and again; and Satan hindered us." And to the married he says:
   [4684] "Be together again, that Satan tempt you not because of your
   incontinency." And again: [4685] "But I say, walk by the Spirit and ye
   shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth against
   the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for these are contrary
   the one to the other: that ye may not do the things that ye would." We
   are a compound of the two, and must endure the strife of the two
   substances. And to the Ephesians: [4686] "Our wrestling is not against
   flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against the powers,
   against the world-rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual hosts
   of wickedness in the heavenly places." Does any one think that we are
   safe, and that it is right to fall asleep when once we have been
   baptized? And so, too, in the epistle to the Hebrews: [4687] "For as
   touching those who were once enlightened and tasted of the heavenly
   gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and tasted the good
   word of God, and the powers of the age to come, and then fell away, it
   is impossible to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify
   to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame."
   Surely we cannot deny that they have been baptized who have been
   illuminated, and have tasted the heavenly gift, and have been made
   partakers of the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the good word of God. But
   if the baptized cannot sin, how is it now that the Apostle says, "And
   have fallen away"? [4688] Montanus and [4689] Novatus would smile at
   this, for they contend that it is impossible to renew again through
   repentance those who have crucified to themselves the Son of God, and
   put Him to an open shame. He therefore corrects this mistake by saying:
   [4690] "But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things
   that accompany salvation, though we thus speak; for God is not
   unrighteous to forget your work and the love which ye shewed towards
   his name, in that ye ministered unto the Saints, and still do
   minister." And truly the unrighteousness of God would be great, if He
   merely punished sin, and did not welcome good works. I have so spoken,
   says the Apostle, to withdraw you from your sins, and to make you more
   careful through fear of despair. But, beloved, I am persuaded better
   things of you, and things that accompany salvation. For it is not
   accordant with the righteousness of God to forget good works, and the
   fact that you have ministered and do minister to the Saints for His
   name's sake, and to remember sins only. The Apostle James also, knowing
   that the baptized can be tempted, and fall of their own free choice,
   says: [4691] "Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he
   hath been approved, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord
   promised to them that love him." And that we may not think that we are
   tempted by God, as we read in Genesis Abraham was, he adds: "Let no man
   say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted
   with evil, and He Himself tempteth no man. But each man is tempted when
   he is drawn away by his own lust and enticed. Then the lust, when it
   hath conceived, beareth sin: and the sin, when it is full grown,
   bringeth forth death." God created us with free will, and we are not
   forced by necessity either to virtue or to vice. Otherwise, if there be
   necessity, there is no crown. As in good works it is God who brings
   them to perfection, for it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that
   runneth, but of God that pitieth and gives us help that we may be able
   to reach the goal: so in things wicked and sinful, the seeds within us
   give the impulse, and these are brought to maturity by the devil. When
   he sees that we are building upon the foundation of Christ, hay, wood,
   stubble, then he applies the match. Let us then build gold, silver,
   costly stones, and he will not venture to tempt us: although even thus
   there is not sure and safe possession. For the lion lurks in ambush to
   slay the innocent. [4692] "Potters' vessels are proved by the furnace,
   and just men by the trial of tribulation." And in another place it is
   written: [4693] "My son, when thou comest to serve the Lord, prepare
   thyself for temptation." Again, the same James says: [4694] "Be ye
   doers of the word, and not hearers only. For if any one is a hearer of
   the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural
   face in a mirror: for he beholdeth himself, and goeth away, and
   straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was." It was useless to
   warn them to add works to faith, if they could not sin after baptism.
   He tells us that [4695] "whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet
   stumble in one point, he is become guilty of all." Which of us is
   without sin? [4696] "God hath shut up all unto disobedience, that he
   might have mercy upon all." Peter also says: [4697] "The Lord knows how
   to deliver the godly out of temptation." And concerning false teachers:
   [4698] "These are springs without water, and mists driven by a storm;
   for whom the blackness of darkness hath been reserved. For, uttering
   proud words of vanity, they entice in the lusts of the flesh, by
   lasciviousness, those who had just escaped, and have turned back to
   error." Does not the Apostle in these words seem to you to have
   depicted the new party of ignorance? For, as it were, they open the
   fountains of knowledge and yet have no water: they promise a shower of
   doctrine like prophetic clouds which have been visited by the truth of
   God, and are driven by the storms of devils and vices. They speak great
   things, and their talk is nothing but pride: [4699] "But every one is
   unclean with God who is lifted up in his own heart." Like those who had
   just escaped from their sins, they return to their own error, and
   persuade men to luxury, and to the delights of eating and the
   gratification of the flesh. For who is not glad to hear them say: "Let
   us eat and drink, and reign for ever"? The wise and prudent they call
   corrupt, but pay more attention to the honey-tongued. John the apostle,
   or rather the Saviour in the person of John, writes thus to the angel
   of the Church of Ephesus: [4700] "I know thy works and thy toil and
   patience, and that thou didst bear for my name's sake, and hast not
   grown weary. But I have this against thee, that thou didst leave thy
   first love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
   and do the first works; or else I will come to thee, and will move thy
   candlestick out of its place, except thou repent." Similarly He urges
   the other churches, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia,
   Laodicea, to repentance, and threatens them unless they return to the
   former works. And in Sardis He says He has a few who have not defiled
   their garments, and they shall walk with Him in white, for they are
   worthy. But they to whom He says: "Remember from whence thou art
   fallen"; and, "Behold the devil is about to cast some of you into
   prison, that ye may be tried"; and, "I know where thou dwellest, even
   where Satan's throne is"; and, "Remember how thou hast received, and
   didst hear, and keep it, and repent," and so on, were of course
   believers, and baptized, who once stood, but fell through sin.

   4. I delayed for a little while the production of proofs from the Old
   Testament, because, wherever the Old Testament is against them they are
   accustomed to cry out that [4701] the Law and the Prophets were until
   John. But who does not know that under the other dispensation of God
   all the saints of past times were of equal merit with Christians at the
   present day? As Abraham in days gone by pleased God in wedlock, so
   virgins now please him in perpetual virginity. He served the Law and
   his own times; let us now serve the Gospel and our times, [4702] upon
   whom the ends of the ages have come. David the chosen one, the man
   after God's own heart, who had performed all His pleasure, and who in a
   certain psalm had said, [4703] "Judge me, O Lord, for I have walked in
   mine integrity: I have trusted also in the Lord and shall not slide.
   Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart," even he
   was afterwards tempted by the devil; and repenting of his sin said,
   [4704] "Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving-kindness."
   He would have a great sin blotted out by great loving-kindness.
   Solomon, beloved of the Lord, and to whom God had twice revealed
   Himself, because he loved women forsook the love of God. It is related
   in the [4705] Book of Days that Manasses the wicked king was restored
   after the Babylonish captivity to his former rank. And Josiah, a holy
   man, [4706] was slain by the king of Egypt on the plain of Megiddo.
   [4707] Joshua also, the son of Josedech and high-priest, although he
   was a type of our Saviour Who bore our sins, and united to Himself a
   church of alien birth from among the Gentiles, is nevertheless,
   according to the letter of Scripture, represented in filthy garments
   after he attained to the priesthood, and with the devil standing at his
   right hand; and white raiment is afterwards restored to him. It is
   needless to tell how Moses and Aaron [4708] offended God at the water
   of strife, and did not enter the land of promise. For the blessed Job
   relates that even the angels and every creature can sin. [4709] "Shall
   mortal man," he says, "be just before God? Shall a man be spotless in
   his works? If he putteth no trust in his servants, and chargeth his
   angels with folly, how much more them that dwell in houses of clay,"
   amongst whom are we, and made of the same clay too. [4710] "The life of
   man is a warfare upon earth." [4711] Lucifer fell who was sending to
   all nations, and he who was nurtured in a paradise of delight as one of
   the twelve precious stones, was wounded and went down to hell from the
   mount of God. Hence the Saviour says in the Gospel: [4712] "I beheld
   Satan falling as lightning from heaven." If he fell who stood on so
   sublime a height, who may not fall? If there are falls in heaven, how
   much more on earth! And yet though Lucifer be fallen (the old serpent
   after his fall), [4713] "his strength is in his loins, and his force is
   in the muscles of his belly. The great trees are overshadowed by him,
   and he sleepeth beside the reed, the rush, and the sedge." [4714] He is
   king over all things that are in the waters--that is to say in the seat
   of pleasure and luxury, of propagation of children, and of the
   fertilisation of the marriage bed. [4715] "For who can strip off his
   outer garment? Who can open the doors of his face? Nations fatten upon
   him, and the tribes of Phenicia divide him." And lest haply the reader
   in his secret thought might imagine that those tribes of Phenicia and
   peoples of Ethiopia only are meant by those to whom the dragon was
   given for food, we immediately find a reference to those who are
   crossing the sea of this world, and are hastening to reach the haven of
   salvation: [4716] "His head stands in the ships of the fishermen like
   an anvil that cannot be wearied: [4717] he counteth iron as straw, and
   brass as rotten wood. And all the gold of the sea under him is as mire.
   He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he values the sea like a pot of
   ointment, and the blackness of the deep as a captive. He beholdeth
   everything that is high." And my friend Jovinianus thinks he can gain
   an easy mastery over him. Why speak of holy men and angels, who, being
   creatures of God, are of course capable of sin? He dared to tempt the
   Son of God, and though smitten through and through with our Lord's
   first and second answer, nevertheless raised his head, and when thrice
   wounded, withdrew only for a time, and deferred rather than removed the
   temptation. And we flatter ourselves on the ground of our baptism,
   which though it put away the sins of the past, cannot keep us for the
   time to come, unless the baptized keep their hearts with all diligence.

   5. At length we have arrived at the question of food, and are
   confronted by our third difficulty. "All things were created to serve
   for the use of mortal men." And as man, a rational animal, in a sense
   the owner and tenant of the world, is subject to God, and worships his
   Creator, so all things living were created either for the food of men,
   or for clothing, or for tilling the earth, or conveying the fruits
   thereof, or to be the companions of man, and hence, because they are
   man's [4718] helpers, they have their name jumenta. [4719] What is
   man,' says David, that thou art mindful of him? And the son of man,
   that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him but little lower than
   the angels, and crownest him with glory and honour. Thou madest him to
   have dominion over the works of thine hands; thou hast put all things
   under his feet: all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field:
   the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, whatsoever passeth
   through the paths of the seas.' Granted, he says, that the ox was
   created for ploughing, the horse for riding, the dog for watching,
   goats for their milk, sheep for their fleeces. What is the use of swine
   if we may not eat their flesh? of roes, stags, fallow-deer, boars,
   hares, and such like game? of geese, wild and tame? of wild ducks and
   [4720] fig-peckers? of woodcocks? of coots? of thrushes? Why do hens
   run about our houses? If they are not eaten, all these creatures were
   created by God for nothing. But what need is there of argument when
   Scripture clearly teaches that every moving creature, like herbs and
   vegetables, were given to us for food, and the Apostle cries aloud
   [4721] All things are clean to the clean, and nothing is to be
   rejected, if it be received with thanksgiving,' and [4722] tells us
   that men will come in the last days, forbidding to marry, and to eat
   meats, which God created for use? The Lord himself was called by the
   Pharisees a wine-bibber and a glutton, the friend of publicans and
   sinners, because he did not decline the invitation of Zacchæus to
   dinner, and went to the marriage-feast. But it is a different matter
   if, as you may foolishly contend, he went to the dinner intending to
   fast, and after the manner of deceivers said, I eat this, not that; I
   do not drink the wine which I created out of water. He did not make
   water, but wine, the type of his blood. After the resurrection he ate a
   fish and part of a honey-comb, not sesame nuts and service-berries. The
   apostle, Peter, did not wait like a Jew for the stars to peep, but went
   upon the house-top to dine at the sixth hour. Paul in the ship broke
   bread, not dried figs. When Timothy's stomach was out of order, he
   advised him to drink wine, not perry. In abstaining from meats they
   please their own fancy: as though superstitious Gentiles did not
   observe the [4723] rites of abstinence connected with the Mother of the
   Gods and with Isis."

   6. I will follow in detail the views now expounded, and before I come
   to Scripture and show by it that fasting is pleasing to God, and
   chastity accepted by him, I will meet philosophic argument with
   argument, and will prove that we are not followers of Empedocles and
   Pythagoras, who on account of their doctrine of the transmigration of
   souls think nothing which lives and moves should be eaten, and look
   upon him who fells a fir-tree or an oak as equally guilty with the
   parricide or the poisoner: but that we worship our Creator Who made all
   things for the use of man. And as the ox was created for ploughing, the
   horse for riding, dogs for watching, goats for milk, sheep for their
   wool: so it was with swine and stags, and roes and hares, and other
   animals: but the immediate purpose of their creation was not that they
   might serve for food, but for other uses of men. For if everything that
   moves and lives was made for food, and prepared for the stomach, let my
   opponents tell me why elephants, lions, leopards, and wolves were
   created; why vipers, scorpions, bugs, lice, and fleas; why the vulture,
   the eagle, the crow, the hawk; why whales, dolphins, seals, and small
   snails were created. Which of us ever eats the flesh of a lion, a
   viper, a vulture, a stork, a kite, or the worms that crawl upon our
   shores? As then these have their proper uses, so may we say that other
   beasts, fishes, birds, were created not for eating, but for medicine.
   In short, to how many uses the flesh of vipers, from which we make our
   antidotes against poison, may be applied, physicians know well. Ivory
   dust is an ingredient in many remedies. Hyena's gall restores
   brightness to the eyes, and its dung and that of dogs cures gangrenous
   wounds. And (it may seem strange to the reader) Galen asserts in his
   treatise on Simples, that human dung is of service in a multitude of
   cases. Naturalists say that snake-skin, boiled in oil, gives wonderful
   relief in ear-ache. What to the uninitiated seems so useless as a bug?
   Yet, suppose a leech to have fastened on the throat, as soon as the
   odour of a bug is inhaled the leech is vomited out, and difficulty in
   urinating is relieved by the same application. As for the fat of pigs,
   geese, fowls, and pheasants, how useful they are is told in all medical
   works, and if you read these books you will see there that the vulture
   has as many curative properties as it has limbs. Peacock's dung allays
   the inflammation of gout. Cranes, storks, eagle's gall, hawk's blood,
   the ostrich, frogs, chameleons, swallow's dung and flesh--in what
   diseases these are suitable remedies, I could tell if it were my
   purpose to discuss bodily ailments and their cure. If you think proper
   you may read Aristotle and [4724] Theophrastus in prose, or [4725]
   Marcellus of Side, and our [4726] Flavius, who discourse on these
   subjects in hexameter verse; the [4727] second Pliny also, and [4728]
   Dioscorides, and others, both naturalists and physicians, who assign to
   every herb, every stone, every animal whether reptile, bird, or fish,
   its own use in the art of which they treat. So then when you ask me why
   the pig was created, I immediately reply, as if two boys were
   disputing, by asking you why were vipers and scorpions? You must not
   judge that anything from the hand of God is superfluous, because there
   are many beasts and birds which your palate rejects. But this may
   perhaps look more like contentiousness and pugnacity than truth. Let me
   tell you therefore that pigs and wild-boars, and stags, and the rest of
   living creatures were created, that soldiers, athletes, sailors,
   rhetoricians, miners, and other slaves of hard toil, who need physical
   strength, might have food: and also those who carry arms and
   provisions, who wear themselves out with the work of hand or foot, who
   ply the oar, who need good lungs to shout and speak, who level
   mountains and sleep out rain or fair. But our religion does not train
   boxers, athletes, sailors, soldiers, or ditchers, but followers of
   wisdom, who devote themselves to the worship of God, and know why they
   were created and are in the world from which they are impatient to
   depart. Hence also the Apostle says: [4729] "When I am weak, then am I
   strong." And [4730] "Though our outward man is decaying, yet our inward
   man is renewed day by day." And [4731] "I have the desire to depart and
   be with Christ." And, [4732] "Make not provision for the flesh to
   fulfil the lusts thereof." Are all commanded [4733] not to have two
   coats, nor food in their scrip, money in their purse, a staff in the
   hand, shoes on the feet? or to sell all they possess and give to the
   poor, and follow Jesus? Of course not: but the command is for those who
   wish to be perfect. On the contrary John the Baptist lays down one rule
   for the soldiers, another for the publicans. But the Lord says in the
   Gospel to him who had boasted of having kept the whole law: [4734] "If
   thou wilt be perfect, go and sell all that thou hast, and give to the
   poor, and come, follow me." That He might not seem to lay a heavy
   burden on unwilling shoulders, He sent His hearer away with full power
   to please himself, saying "If thou wilt be perfect." And so I too say
   to you: If you wish to be perfect, it is good not to drink wine, and
   eat flesh. If you wish to be perfect, it is better to enrich the mind
   than to stuff the body. But if you are an infant and fond of the cooks
   and their preparations, no one will snatch the dainties out of your
   mouth. Eat and drink, and, if you like, with Israel rise up and play,
   and sing [4735] "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die." Let
   him eat and drink, who looks for death when he has feasted, and who
   says with Epicurus, "There is nothing after death, and death itself is
   nothing." We believe Paul when he says in tones of thunder: [4736]
   "Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats. But God will destroy
   both them and it."

   7. I have quoted these few passages of Scripture to show that we are at
   one with the philosophers. But who does not know that no universal law
   of nature regulates the food of all nations, and that each eats those
   things of which it has abundance? For instance, the Arabians and
   Saracens, and all the wild tribes of the desert live on camel's milk
   and flesh: for the camel, to suit the climate and barren soil of those
   regions, is easily bred and reared. They think it wicked to eat the
   flesh of swine. Why? Because pigs which fatten on acorns, chestnuts,
   roots of ferns, and barley, are seldom or never found among them: and
   if they were found, they would not afford the nourishment of which we
   spoke just now. The exact opposite is the case with the northern
   peoples. If you were to force them to eat the flesh of asses and
   camels, they would think it the same as though they were compelled to
   devour a wolf or a crow. In Pontus and Phrygia a pater-familias pays a
   good price for fat white worms with blackish heads, which breed in
   decayed wood. And as with us the woodcock and fig-pecker, the mullet
   and scar, are reputed delicacies, so with them it is a luxury to eat
   the [4737] xylophagus. Again, because throughout the glowing wastes of
   the desert clouds of locusts are found, it is customary with the
   peoples of the East and of Libya to feed on locusts. John the Baptist
   proves the truth of this. Compel a Phrygian or a native of Pontus to
   eat a locust, and he will think it scandalous. Force a Syrian, an
   African, or Arabian to swallow worms, he will have the same contempt
   for them as for flies, millepedes, and lizards, although the Syrians
   are accustomed to eat land-crocodiles, and the Africans even green
   lizards. In Egypt and Palestine, owing to the scarcity of cattle no one
   eats beef, or makes the flesh of bulls or oxen, or calves, a portion of
   their food. Moreover, in my province [4738] it is considered a crime to
   eat veal. Accordingly the Emperor Valens recently promulgated a law
   throughout the East, prohibiting the killing and eating of calves. He
   had in view the interests of agriculture, and wished to check the bad
   practice of the commoner sort of the people who imitated the Jews in
   devouring the flesh of calves, instead of fowls and sucking pigs. The
   Nomad tribes, and the [4739] Troglodytes, and Scythians, and the
   barbarous [4740] Huns with whom we have recently become acquainted, eat
   flesh half raw. Moreover the Icthyophagi, a wandering race on the
   shores of the Red Sea, broil fish on the stones made hot by the sun,
   and subsist on this poor food. The [4741] Sarmatians, the [4742]
   Chuadi, the [4743] Vandals, and countless other races, delight in the
   flesh of horses and wolves. Why should I speak of other nations when I
   myself, a youth on a visit to Gaul, heard that the Atticoti, a British
   tribe, eat human flesh, and that although they find herds of swine, and
   droves of large or small cattle in the woods, it is their custom to cut
   off the buttocks of the shepherds and the breasts of their women, and
   to regard them as the greatest delicacies? The Scots have no wives of
   their own; as though they read Plato's Republic and took Cato for their
   leader, no man among them has his own wife, but like beasts they
   indulge their lust to their hearts' content. The Persians, Medes,
   Indians, and Ethiopians, peoples on a par with Rome itself, have
   intercourse with mothers and grandmothers, with daughters and
   granddaughters. The [4744] Massagetæ and [4745] Derbices think those
   persons most unhappy who die of sickness--and when parents, kindred, or
   friends reach old age, they are murdered and devoured. It is thought
   better that they should be eaten by the people themselves than by the
   worms. The [4746] Tibareni crucify those whom they have loved before
   when they have grown old. The [4747] Hyrcani throw them out half alive
   to the birds and dogs: the Caspians leave them dead for the same
   beasts. The Scythians bury alive with the remains of the dead those who
   were beloved of the deceased. The Bactrians throw their old men to dogs
   which they rear for the very purpose, and when Stasanor, Alexander's
   general, wished to correct the practice, he almost lost his province.
   Force an Egyptian to drink sheep's milk: drive, if you can, a Pelusiote
   to eat an onion. Almost every city in Egypt venerates its own beasts
   and monsters, and whatever be the object of worship, that they think
   inviolable and sacred. Hence it is that their towns also are named
   after animals Leonto, Cyno, Lyco, Busyris, Thmuis, which is, being
   interpreted, a he-goat. And to make us understand what sort of gods
   Egypt always welcomed, one of their cities was recently called [4748]
   Antinous after Hadrian's favourite. You see clearly then that not only
   in eating, but also in burial, in wedlock, and in every department of
   life, each race follows its own practice and peculiar usages, and takes
   that for the law of nature which is most familiar to it. But suppose
   all nations alike ate flesh, and let that be everywhere lawful which
   the place produces. How does it concern us whose conversation is in
   heaven? who, as well as Pythagoras and Empedocles and all lovers of
   wisdom, are not bound to the circumstances of our birth, but of our new
   birth: who by abstinence subjugate our refractory flesh, eager to
   follow the allurements of lust? The eating of flesh, and drinking of
   wine, and fulness of stomach, is the seed-plot of lust. And so the
   comic poet says, [4749] "Venus shivers unless Ceres and Bacchus be with
   her."

   8. Through the five senses, as through open windows, vice has access to
   the soul. The metropolis and citadel of the mind cannot be taken unless
   the enemy have previously entered by its doors. The soul is distressed
   by the disorder they produce, and is led captive by sight, hearing,
   smell, taste, and touch. If any one delights in the sports of the
   circus, or the struggles of athletes, the versatility of actors, the
   figure of women, in splendid jewels, dress, silver and gold, and other
   things of the kind, the liberty of the soul is lost through the windows
   of the eyes, and the prophet's words are fulfilled: [4750] "Death is
   come up into our windows." Again, our sense of hearing is flattered by
   the tones of various instruments and the modulations of the voice; and
   whatever enters the ear by the songs of poets and comedians, by the
   pleasantries and verses of pantomimic actors, weakens the manly fibre
   of the mind. Then, again, no one but a profligate denies that the
   profligate and licentious find a delight in sweet odours, different
   sorts of incense, fragrant balsam, [4751] kuphi, [4752] oenanthe, and
   musk, which is nothing but the skin of a foreign rat. And who does not
   know that gluttony is the mother of avarice, and, as it were, fetters
   the heart and keeps it pressed down upon the earth? For the sake of a
   temporary gratification of the appetite, land and sea are ransacked,
   and we toil and sweat our lives through, that we may send down our
   throats honey-wine and costly food. The desire to handle other men's
   persons, and the burning lust for women, is a passion bordering on
   insanity. To gratify this sense we languish, grow angry, throw
   ourselves about with joy, indulge envy, engage in rivalry, are filled
   with anxiety, and when we have terminated the pleasure with more or
   less repentance, we once more take fire, and want to do that which we
   again regret doing. Where, then, that which we may call the thin edge
   of disturbance, has entered the citadel of the mind through these
   doors, what will become of its liberty, its endurance, its thought of
   God, particularly since the sense of touch can picture to itself even
   bygone pleasures, and through the recollection of vice forces the soul
   to take part in them, and after a manner to practice what it does not
   actually commit?

   9. At the call of reasoning such as this, many philosophers have
   forsaken the crowded cities, and their pleasure gardens in the suburbs
   with well-watered grounds, shady trees, twittering birds, crystal
   fountains, murmuring brooks, and many charms for eye and ear, lest
   through luxury and abundance of riches, the firmness of the mind should
   be enfeebled, and its purity debauched. For there is no good in
   frequently seeing objects which may one day lead to your captivity, or
   in making trial of things which you would find it hard to do without.
   Even the Pythagoreans shunned company of this kind and were wont to
   dwell in solitary places in the desert. The Platonists also and Stoics
   lived in the groves and porticos of temples, that, admonished by the
   sanctity of their restricted abode, they might think of nothing but
   virtue. Plato, moreover, himself, when [4753] Diogenes trampled on his
   couches with muddy feet (he being a rich man), chose a house called
   [4754] Academia at some distance from the city, in a spot not only
   lonely but unhealthy, so that he might have leisure for philosophy. His
   object was that by constant anxiety about sickness the assaults of lust
   might be defeated, and that his disciples might experience no pleasure
   but that afforded by the things they learned. We have read of some who
   took out their own eyes lest through sight they might lose the
   contemplation of philosophy. Hence it was that [4755] Crates the famous
   Theban, after throwing into the sea a considerable weight of gold,
   exclaimed, "Go to the bottom, ye evil lusts: I will drown you that you
   may not drown me." But if anyone thinks to enjoy keenly meat and drink
   in excess, and at the same time to devote himself to philosophy, that
   is to say, to live in luxury and yet not to be hampered by the vices
   attendant on luxury, he deceives himself. For if it be the case that
   even when far distant from them we are frequently caught in the snares
   of nature, and are compelled to desire those things of which we have a
   scant supply: what folly it is to think we are free when we are
   surrounded by the nets of pleasure! We think of what we see, hear,
   smell, taste, handle, and are led to desire the thing which affords us
   pleasure. That the mind sees and hears, and that we can neither hear
   nor see anything unless our senses are fixed upon the objects of sight
   and hearing, is an old saw. It is difficult, or rather impossible, when
   we are swimming in luxury and pleasure not to think of what we are
   doing: and it is an idle pretence which some men put forward [4756]
   that they can take their fill of pleasure with their faith and purity
   and mental uprightness unimpaired. It is a violation of nature to revel
   in pleasure, and the Apostle gives a caution against this very thing
   when he says, [4757] "She that giveth herself to pleasure is dead while
   she liveth."

   10. The bodily senses are like horses madly racing, but the soul like a
   charioteer holds the reins. And as horses without a driver go at
   break-neck speed, so the body if it be not governed by the reasonable
   soul rushes to its own destruction. The philosophers make use of
   another illustration of the relations between soul and body; [4758]
   they say the body is a boy, the soul his tutor. Hence the [4759]
   historian tells us "that our soul directs, our body serves. The one we
   have in common with the gods, the other with the beasts." So then
   unless the vices of youth and boyhood are regulated by the wisdom of
   the tutor, every effort and every impulse sets strongly in the
   direction of wantonness. We might lose four of the senses and yet
   live,--that is we could do without sight, hearing, smell, and the
   pleasures of touch. But a human being cannot subsist without tasting
   food. It follows that reason must be present, that we may take food of
   such a kind and in such quantities as will not burden the body, or
   hinder the free movement of the soul: for it is the way with us that we
   eat, and walk, and sleep, and digest our food, and afterwards in the
   fulness of blood have to bear the spur of lust. [4760] "Wine is a
   mocker, strong drink a brawler." Whosoever has much to do with these is
   not wise. And we should not take such food as is difficult of
   digestion, or such as when eaten will give us reason to complain that
   we got it and lost it with much effort. The preparation of vegetables,
   fruit, and pulse is easy, and does not require the skill of expensive
   cooks: our bodies are nourished by them with little trouble on our
   part; and, if taken in moderation, such food is easier to digest, and
   at less cost, because it does not stimulate the appetite, and therefore
   is not devoured with avidity. No one has his stomach inflated or
   overloaded if he eats only one or two dishes, and those inexpensive
   ones: such a condition comes of pampering the taste with a variety of
   meats. The smells of the kitchen may induce us to eat, but when hunger
   is satisfied, they make us their slaves. Hence gorging gives rise to
   disease: and many persons find relief for the discomfort of gluttony in
   emetics,--what they disgraced themselves by putting in, they with still
   greater disgrace put out.

   11. [4761] Hippocrates in his Aphorisms teaches that stout persons of a
   coarse habit of body, when once they have attained their full growth,
   unless the plethora be quickly relieved by blood-letting, develop
   tendencies to paralysis and the worst forms of disease: they must
   therefore be bled, that there may be room for fresh growth. For it is
   not the nature of our bodies to continue in one stay, but go on either
   to increase or decrease, and no animal can live which is incapable of
   growth. Whence [4762] Galen, a very learned man and the commentator on
   Hippocrates, says in his exhortation to the practice of medicine that
   athletes whose whole life and art consists in stuffing cannot live
   long, nor be healthy: and that their souls enveloped with superfluous
   blood and fat, and as it were covered with mud, have no refined or
   heavenly thoughts, but are always intent upon gluttonous and voracious
   feasting. Diogenes maintains that tyrants do not bring about
   revolutions in cities, and foment wars civil or foreign for the sake of
   a simple diet of vegetables and fruits, but for costly meats and the
   delicacies of the table. And, strange to say, Epicurus, the defender of
   pleasure, in all his books speaks of nothing but vegetables and fruits;
   and he says that we ought to live on cheap food because the preparation
   of sumptuous banquets of flesh involves great care and suffering, and
   greater pains attend the search for such delicacies than pleasures the
   consumption of them. Our bodies need only something to eat and drink.
   Where there is bread and water, and the like, nature is satisfied.
   Whatever more there may be does not go to meet the wants of life, but
   are ministers to vicious pleasure. Eating and drinking does not quench
   the longing for luxuries, but appeases hunger and thirst. Persons who
   feed on flesh want also gratifications not found in flesh. But they who
   adopt a simple diet do not look for flesh. Further, we cannot devote
   ourselves to wisdom if our thoughts are running on a well-laden table,
   the supply of which requires an excess of work and anxiety. The wants
   of nature are soon satisfied: cold and hunger can be banished with
   simple food and clothing. Hence the Apostle says: "Having food and
   clothing let us be therewith content." Delicacies and the various
   dishes of the feast are the nurses of avarice. The soul greatly exults
   when you are content with little: you have the world beneath your feet,
   and can exchange all its power, its feasts, and its lusts, the objects
   for which men rake money together, for common food, and make up for
   them all with a sack-cloth shirt. Take away the luxurious feasting and
   the gratification of lust, and no one will want riches to be used
   either in the belly, or beneath it. The invalid only regains his health
   by diminishing and carefully selecting his food, i.e., in medical
   phrase, by adopting a "slender diet." The same food that recovers
   health, can preserve it, for no one can imagine vegetables to be the
   cause of disease. And if vegetables do not give the strength of Milo of
   Crotona--a strength supplied and nourished by meat--what need has a
   wise man and a Christian philosopher of such strength as is required by
   athletes and soldiers, and which, if he had it, would only stimulate to
   vice? Let those persons deem meat accordant with health who wish to
   gratify their lust, and who, sunk in filthy pleasure, are always at
   heat. What a Christian wants is health, but not superfluous strength.
   And it ought not to disturb us if we find but few supporters; for the
   pure and temperate are as rare as good and faithful friends, and virtue
   is always scarce. Study the temperance of [4763] Fabricius, or the
   poverty of [4764] Curius, and in a great city you will find few worthy
   of your imitation. You need not fear that if you do not eat flesh,
   fowlers and hunters will have learnt their craft in vain.

   12. We have read that some who suffered with disease of the joints and
   with gouty humours recovered their health by proscribing delicacies,
   and coming down to a simple board and mean food. For they were then
   free from the worry of managing a house and from unlimited feasting.
   Horace [4765] makes fun of the longing for food which when eaten leaves
   nothing but regret.

   "Scorn pleasure; she but hurts when bought with pain."

   And when, in the delightful retirement of the country, by way of
   satirizing voluptuous men, he described himself as plump and fat, his
   sportive verse ran thus:

   "Pay me a visit if you want to laugh,

   You'll find me fat and sleek with well-dress'd hide,

   Like any pig from Epicurus' sty."

   But even if our food be the commonest, we must avoid repletion. For
   nothing is so destructive to the mind as a full belly, fermenting like
   a wine vat and giving forth its gases on all sides. What sort of
   fasting is it, or what refreshment is there after fasting, when we are
   blown out with yesterday's dinner, and our [4766] stomach is made a
   factory for the closet? We wish to get credit for protracted
   abstinence, and all the while we devour so much that a day and a night
   can scarcely digest it. The proper name to give it is not fasting, but
   rather debauch and rank indigestion.

   13. [4767] Dicæarchus in his book of Antiquities, describing Greece,
   relates that under Saturn, that is in the Golden Age, when the ground
   brought forth all things abundantly, no one ate flesh, but every one
   lived on field produce and fruits which the earth bore of itself.
   Xenophon in eight books narrates the life of Cyrus, King of the
   Persians, and asserts that they supported life on barley, cress, salt,
   and black bread. Both the aforesaid Xenophon, Theophrastus, and almost
   all the Greek writers testify to the frugal diet of the Spartans.
   [4768] Chæremon the Stoic, a man of great eloquence, has a treatise on
   the life of the ancient priests of Egypt, who, he says, laid aside all
   worldly business and cares, and were ever in the temple, studying
   nature and the regulating causes of the heavenly bodies; they never had
   intercourse with women; they never from the time they began to devote
   themselves to the divine service set eyes on their kindred and
   relations, nor even saw their children; they always abstained from
   flesh and wine, on account of the light-headedness and dizziness which
   a small quantity of food caused, and especially to avoid the
   stimulation of the lustful appetite engendered by this meat and drink.
   They seldom ate bread, that they might not load the stomach. And
   whenever they ate it, they mixed pounded hyssop with all that they
   took, so that the action of its warmth might diminish the weight of the
   heavier food. They used no oil except with vegetables, and then only in
   small quantities, to mitigate the unpalatable taste. What need, he
   says, to speak of birds, when they avoided even eggs and milk as flesh.
   The one, they said, was liquid flesh, the other was blood with the
   colour changed? Their bed was made of palm-leaves, called by them baiæ:
   a sloping footstool laid upon the ground served for a pillow, and they
   could go without food for two or three days. The humours of the body
   which arise from sedentary habits were dried up by reducing their diet
   to an extreme point.

   14. [4769] Josephus in the second book of the history of the Jewish
   captivity, and in the eighteenth book of the Antiquities, and the two
   treatises against Apion, describes three sects of the Jews, the
   Pharisees, Sadducees, and Essenes. On the last of these he bestows
   wondrous praise because they practised perpetual abstinence from wives,
   wine, and flesh, and made a second nature of their daily fast. [4770]
   Philo, too, a man of great learning, published a treatise of his own on
   their mode of life. [4771] Neanthes of Cizycus, and [4772] Asclepiades
   of Cyprus, at the time when Pygmalion ruled over the East, relate that
   the eating of flesh was unknown. Eubulus, also, who wrote the history
   of [4773] Mithras in many volumes, relates that among the Persians
   there are three kinds of Magi, the first of whom, those of greatest
   learning and eloquence, take no food except meal and vegetables. At
   Eleusis it is customary to abstain from fowls and fish and certain
   fruits. [4774] Bardesanes, a Babylonian, divides the Gymnosophists of
   India into two classes, the one called Brahmans, the other Samaneans,
   who are so rigidly self-restrained that they support themselves either
   with the fruit of trees which grow on the banks of the Ganges, or with
   common food of rice or flour, and when the king visits them, he is wont
   to adore them, and thinks the peace of his country depends upon their
   prayers. Euripides relates that the prophets of Jupiter in Crete
   abstained not only from flesh, but also from cooked food. [4775]
   Xenocrates the philosopher writes that at Athens out of all the laws of
   [4776] Triptolemus only three precepts remain in the temple of Ceres:
   respect to parents, reverence for the gods, and abstinence from flesh.
   [4777] Orpheus in his song utterly denounces the eating of flesh. I
   might speak of the frugality of Pythagoras, Socrates, and [4778]
   Antisthenes to our confusion: but it would be tedious, and would
   require a work to itself. At all events this is the Antisthenes who,
   after teaching rhetoric with renown, on hearing Socrates, is related to
   have said to his disciples, "Go, and seek a master, for I have now
   found one." He immediately, sold what he had, divided the proceeds
   among the people, and kept nothing for himself but a small cloak. Of
   his poverty and toil Xenophon in the Symposium is a witness, and so are
   his countless treatises, some philosophical, some rhetorical. His most
   famous follower was the great Diogenes, who was mightier than King
   Alexander in that he conquered human nature. For Antisthenes would not
   take a single pupil, and when he could not get rid of the persistent
   Diogenes he threatened him with a stick if he did not depart. The
   latter is said to have laid down his head and said, "No stick will be
   hard enough to prevent me from following you." [4779] Satyrus, the
   biographer of illustrious men, relates that Diogenes to guard himself
   against the cold, folded his cloak double: his scrip was his pantry:
   and when aged he carried a stick to support his feeble frame, and was
   commonly called "Old Hand-to-mouth," because to that very hour he
   begged and received food from any one. His home was the gateways and
   city arcades. And when he wriggled into his tub, he would joke about
   his movable house that adapted itself to the seasons. For when the
   weather was cold he used to turn the mouth of the tub towards the
   south: in summer towards the north; and whatever the direction of the
   sun might be, that way the palace of Diogenes was turned. He had a
   wooden dish for drinking; but on one occasion seeing a boy drinking
   with the hollow of his hand he is related to have dashed the cup to the
   ground, saying that he did not know nature provided a cup. His virtue
   and self-restraint were proved even by his death. It is said that, now
   an old man, he was on his way to the Olympic games, which used to be
   attended by a great concourse of people from all parts of Greece, when
   he was overtaken by fever and lay down upon the bank by the road-side.
   And when his friends wished to place him on a beast or in a conveyance,
   he did not assent, but crossing to the shade of a tree said, "Go your
   way, I pray you, and see the games: this night will prove me either
   conquered or conqueror. If I conquer the fever, I shall go to the
   games: if the fever conquers me, I shall enter the unseen world." There
   through the night he lay gasping for breath and did not, as we are
   told, so much die as banish the fever by death. I have cited the
   example of only one philosopher, so that our fine, erect, muscular
   athletes, who hardly make a shadow of a footmark in their swift
   passage, whose words are in their fists and their reasoning in their
   heels, who either know nothing of apostolic poverty and the hardness of
   the cross, or despise it, may at least imitate Gentile moderation.

   15. So far I have dealt with the arguments and examples of
   philosophers. Now I will pass on to the beginning of the human race,
   that is, to the sphere which belongs to us. I will first point out that
   Adam received a command in paradise to abstain from one tree though he
   might eat the other fruit. The blessedness of paradise could not be
   consecrated without abstinence from food. So long as he fasted, he
   remained in paradise; he ate, and was cast out; he was no sooner cast
   out than he married a wife. While he fasted in paradise he continued a
   virgin: when he filled himself with food in the earth, he bound himself
   with the tie of marriage. And yet though cast out he did not
   immediately receive permission to eat flesh; but only the fruits of
   trees and the produce of the crops, and herbs and vegetables were given
   him for food, that even when an exile from paradise he might feed not
   upon flesh which was not to be found in paradise, but upon grain and
   fruit like that of paradise. But afterwards when [4780] God saw that
   the heart of man from his youth was set on wickedness continually, and
   that His Spirit could not remain in them because they were flesh, He by
   the deluge passed sentence on the works of the flesh, and, taking note
   of the extreme greediness of men, [4781] gave them liberty to eat
   flesh: so that while understanding that all things were lawful for
   them, they might not greatly desire that which was allowed, lest they
   should turn a commandment into a cause of transgression. And yet even
   then, fasting was in part commanded. For, seeing that some animals are
   called clean, some unclean, and the unclean animals were taken into
   Noah's ark by pairs, the clean in uneven numbers (and of course the
   eating of the unclean was forbidden, otherwise the term unclean would
   be unmeaning), fasting was in part consecrated: restraint in the use of
   all was taught by the prohibition of some. Why did Esau lose his
   birthright? Was it not on account of food? and he could not atone with
   tears for the impatience of his appetite. The people of Israel cast out
   from Egypt and on their way to the land of promise, the land flowing
   with milk and honey, longed for the flesh of Egypt, and the melons and
   garlic, saying: [4782] "Would that we had died by the hand of the Lord
   in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots." And again, [4783]
   "Who shall give us flesh to eat? We remember the fish which we did eat
   in Egypt for nought; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and
   the onions, and the garlic: but now our soul is dried away: we have
   nought save this manna to look to."

   They despised angels' food, and sighed for the flesh of Egypt. Moses
   for forty days and forty nights fasted on Mount Sinai, and showed even
   then that man does not live on bread alone, but on every word of God.
   He says to the Lord, "the people is full and maketh idols." Moses with
   empty stomach received the law written with the finger of God. The
   people that ate and drank and rose up to play fashioned a golden calf,
   and preferred an Egyptian ox to the majesty of the Lord. The toil of so
   many days perished through the fulness of a single hour. Moses boldly
   broke the tables: for he knew that drunkards cannot hear the word of
   God. [4784] "The beloved grew thick, waxed fat, and became sleek: he
   kicked and forsook the Lord which made him, and departed from the God
   of his salvation." Hence also it is enjoined in the same Book of
   Deuteronomy: [4785] "Beware, lest when thou hast eaten and drunk, and
   hast built goodly houses, and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply,
   and thy silver and gold is multiplied, then thine heart be lifted up,
   and thou forget the Lord thy God." In short the people ate and their
   heart grew thick, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with
   their ears, and understand with their heart: so the people well fed and
   fat-fleshed could not bear the countenance of Moses who fasted, for, to
   correctly render the Hebrew, it was [4786] furnished with horns through
   his converse with God. And it was not, as some think, to show that
   there is no difference between virginity and marriage, but to assert
   his sympathy with severe fasting, that our Lord and Saviour when he was
   transfigured on the Mount revealed Moses and Elias with Himself in
   glory. Although Moses and Elias were properly types of the Law and the
   Prophets, as is clearly witnessed by the Gospel: [4787] "They spake of
   his departure which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem." For the
   passion of our Lord is declared not by virginity or marriage, but by
   the Law and the Prophets. If, however, any persons contentiously
   maintain that by Moses is signified marriage, by Elias virginity, let
   me tell them briefly that Moses died and was buried, but Elias was
   carried off in a chariot of fire and entered on immortality before he
   approached death. But the second writing of the tables could not be
   effected without fasting. What was lost by drunkenness was regained by
   abstinence, a proof that by fasting we can return to paradise, whence,
   though fulness, we have been expelled. In [4788] Exodus we read that
   the battle was fought against Amalek while Moses prayed, and the whole
   people fasted until the evening. [4789] Joshua, the son of Nun, bade
   sun and moon stand still, and the victorious army prolonged its fast
   for more than a day. [4790] Saul, as it is written in the first book of
   Kings, pronounced a curse on him who ate bread before the evening, and
   until he had avenged himself upon his enemies. So none of his people
   tasted any food. And all they of the land took food. And so binding was
   a solemn fast once it was proclaimed to the Lord, that Jonathan, to
   whom the victory was due, was taken by lot, and [4791] could not escape
   the charge of sinning in ignorance, and his father's hand was raised
   against him, and the prayers of the people scarce availed to save him.
   [4792] Elijah after the preparation of a forty days fast saw God on
   Mount Horeb, and heard from Him the words, "What doest thou here,
   Elijah?" There is much more familiarity in this than in the "Where art
   thou, Adam?" of Genesis. The latter was intended to excite the fears of
   one who had fed and was lost; the former was affectionately addressed
   to a fasting servant. [4793] When the people were assembled in Mizpeh,
   Samuel proclaimed a fast, and so strengthened them, and thus made them
   prevail against the enemy. [4794] The attack of the Assyrians was
   repulsed, and the might of Sennacherib utterly crushed, by the tears
   and sackcloth of King Hezekiah, and by his humbling himself with
   fasting. So also the city of Nineveh by fasting excited compassion and
   turned aside the threatening wrath of the Lord. And [4795] Sodom and
   Gomorrha might have appeased it, had they been willing to repent, and
   through the aid of fasting gain for themselves tears of repentance.
   [4796] Ahab, the most impious of kings, by fasting and wearing
   sackcloth, succeeded in escaping the sentence of God, and in deferring
   the overthrow of his house to the days of his posterity. [4797] Hannah,
   the wife of Elkanah, by fasting won the gift of a son. [4798] At
   Babylon the magicians came into peril, every interpreter of dreams,
   soothsayer, and diviner was slain. Daniel and the three youths gained a
   good report by fasting, and although they were fed on pulse, they were
   fairer and wiser than they who ate the flesh from the king's table.
   Then it is written that Daniel fasted for three weeks; he ate no
   pleasant bread; flesh and wine entered not his mouth; he was not
   anointed with oil; and the angel came to him saying, [4799] "Daniel,
   thou art worthy of compassion." He who in the eyes of God was worthy of
   compassion, afterwards was an object of terror to the lions in their
   den. How fair a thing is that which propitiates God, tames lions,
   terrifies demons! Habakkuk (although we do not find this in the Hebrew
   Scriptures [4800] ) was sent to him with the reaper's meal, for by a
   week's abstinence he had merited so distinguished a server. David, when
   his son was in danger after his adultery, made confession in ashes and
   with fasting. [4801] He tells us that he ate ashes like bread, and
   mingled his drink with weeping. [4802] And that his knees became weak
   through fasting. Yet he had certainly heard from Nathan the words,
   [4803] "The Lord also hath put away thy sin." Samson and Samuel drank
   neither wine nor strong drink, for they were children of promise, and
   conceived in abstinence and fasting. [4804] Aaron and the other priests
   when about to enter the temple, refrained from all intoxicating drink
   for fear they should die. Whence we learn that they die who minister in
   the Church without sobriety. And hence it is a reproach against Israel:
   [4805] "Ye gave my Nazarites wine to drink." Jonadab, the son of
   Rechab, commanded his sons to drink no wine for ever. And when Jeremiah
   offered them wine to drink, and they of their own accord refused it,
   the Lord spake by the prophet, saying: [4806] "Because ye have obeyed
   the commandment of Jonadab your father, Jonadab the son of Rechab shall
   not want a man to stand before me for ever." On the [4807] threshold of
   the Gospel appears Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, the wife of one
   husband, and a woman who was always fasting. Long-continued chastity
   and persistent fasting welcomed a Virgin Lord. His forerunner and
   herald, John, fed on locusts and wild honey, not on flesh; and the
   hermits of the desert and the monks in their cells, at first used the
   same sustenance. But the Lord Himself consecrated His baptism by a
   forty days' fast, and He taught us that the more violent devils [4808]
   cannot be overcome, except by prayer and fasting. [4809] Cornelius the
   centurion was found worthy through alms-giving and frequent fasts to
   receive the gift of the Holy Spirit before baptism. [4810] The Apostle
   Paul, after speaking of hunger and thirst, and his other labours,
   perils from robbers, shipwrecks, loneliness, enumerates frequent fasts.
   And he [4811] advises his disciple Timothy, who had a weak stomach, and
   was subject to many infirmities, to drink wine in moderation: "Drink no
   longer water," he says. The fact that he bids him no longer drink water
   shows that he had previously drunk water. The apostle would not have
   allowed this had not frequent infirmities and bodily pain demanded the
   concession.

   16. The Apostle does indeed [4812] blame those who forbade marriage,
   and commanded to abstain from food, which God created for use with
   thanksgiving. But he has in view Marcion, and Tatian, and other
   heretics, who inculcate perpetual abstinence, to destroy, and express
   their hatred and contempt for, the works of the Creator. But we praise
   every creature of God, and yet prefer leanness to corpulence,
   abstinence to luxury, fasting to fulness. [4813] "He that laboureth
   laboureth for himself, and he is eager to his own destruction." And,
   [4814] "From the days of John the Baptist (who fasted and was a virgin)
   until now the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and men of violence
   take it by force." For we are afraid lest at the coming of the eternal
   judge we be caught, as in the days of the flood, and at the overthrow
   of Sodom and Gomorrha, eating and drinking, and marrying, and giving in
   marriage. For both the flood and the fire from heaven found fulness as
   well as marriage ready for destruction. Nor need we wonder if the
   Apostle commands that everything sold in the market be bought and
   eaten, since with idolaters, and with those who still ate in the
   temples of the idols meats offered to idols as such, it passed for the
   highest abstinence to abstain only from food eaten by the Gentiles. And
   if he says to the Romans: [4815] "Let not him that eateth set at nought
   him that eateth not: and let not him that eateth not judge him that
   eateth," he does not make fasting and fulness of equal merit, but he is
   speaking against those believers in Christ who were still judaizing:
   and he warns Gentile believers, not to offend those by their food who
   were still too weak in faith. In brief this is clear enough in the
   sequel: [4816] "I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing
   is unclean of itself: save that to him who accounteth anything to be
   unclean, to him it is unclean. For if because of meat thy brother is
   grieved, thou walkest no longer in love. Destroy not with thy meat him
   for whom Christ died. Let not then your good be evil spoken of: for the
   Kingdom of God is not eating and drinking." And that no one may suppose
   he is referring to fasting and not to Jewish superstition, he
   immediately explains, [4817] "One man hath faith to eat all things: but
   he that is weak eateth herbs." And again, [4818] "One man esteemeth one
   day above another: another esteemeth every day alike. Let each man be
   fully assured in his own mind. He that regardeth the day, regardeth it
   unto the Lord: and he that eateth, eateth unto the Lord, for he giveth
   God thanks; and he that eateth not, unto the Lord he eateth not, and
   giveth God thanks." For they who were still weak in faith and thought
   some meats clean, some unclean: and supposed there was a difference
   between one day and another, for example, that the Sabbath, and the New
   Moons, and the Feast of Tabernacles were holier than other days, were
   commanded to eat herbs which are indifferently partaken of by all. But
   such as were of stronger faith believed all meats and all days to be
   alike.

   17. My opponent has dared to maintain that our Lord was called by the
   Pharisees a wine-bibber and a glutton: and from the fact of His going
   to marriage feasts and from His not despising the banquets of sinners,
   I am to infer His wishes respecting ourselves. That Lord, so you
   suppose, is a glutton who fasted forty days to hallow Christian
   fasting; [4819] who calls them blessed that hunger and thirst; [4820]
   who says that He has food, not that which the disciples surmised, but
   such as would not perish for ever; [4821] who forbids us to think of
   the morrow; who, though He is said to have hungered and thirsted, and
   to have gone frequently to various meals, except in celebrating the
   mystery whereby He represented His passion, or [4822] in proving the
   reality of His body is nowhere described as ministering to His
   appetite; [4823] who tells of purple-clad Dives in hell for his
   feasting, and says that poor Lazarus for his abstinence was in
   Abraham's bosom; who, when we fast, [4824] bids us anoint our head and
   wash our face, that we fast not to gain glory from men, but praise from
   the Lord; who did indeed [4825] after His resurrection eat part of a
   broiled fish and of a honey-comb, not to allay hunger and to gratify
   His palate, but to show the reality of His own body. For whenever He
   raised anyone from the dead He [4826] ordered that food should be given
   him to eat, lest the resurrection should be thought a delusion. And
   this is why Lazarus after his resurrection is [4827] described as being
   at the feast with our Lord. We do not deny that fish and other kinds of
   flesh, if we choose, may be taken as food; but as we prefer virginity
   to marriage, so do we esteem fasting and spirituality above meats and
   full-bloodedness. And if Peter [4828] before dinner went to the supper
   chamber at the sixth hour, a chance fit of hunger does not prejudice
   fasting. For, if this were so, because our Lord [4829] at the sixth
   hour sat weary on the well of Samaria and wished to drink, all must of
   necessity, whether they so desire or not, drink at that time. Possibly
   it was the Sabbath, or the Lord's day, and he hungered at the sixth
   hour after two or three days' fasting; for I could never believe that
   the Apostle, if he had eaten a dinner only one day previous and had
   been blown out with a great meal, would have been hungry by noon next
   day. But if he did dine the day previous, and was hungry next day
   before luncheon, I do not think that a man who was so soon hungry ate
   until he was satisfied. Again, God by the mouth of Isaiah says what
   fast He did not choose: [4830] "In the day of your fast ye find
   pleasure, and afflict the lowly: ye fast for strife and debate, and to
   smite with the fist of wickedness. It is not such a fast that I have
   chosen, saith the Lord." What kind He has chosen He thus teaches: "Deal
   thy bread to the hungry, and bring the houseless poor into thy house.
   When thou seest the naked cover him, and hide not thyself from thine
   own flesh." He did not therefore reject fasting, but showed what He
   would have it to be: for that bodily hunger is not pleasing to God
   which is made null and void by strife, and plunder, and lust. If God
   does not desire fasting, how is it that in [4831] Leviticus He commands
   the whole people in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month,
   to fast until the evening, and threatens that he who does not afflict
   his soul shall die and be cut off from his people? How is it that the
   [4832] graves of lust where the people fell in their devotion to flesh
   remain even to this day in the wilderness? Do we not read that the
   stupid people gorged themselves with quails until the wrath of God came
   upon them? Why was the man of God at whose prophecy the hand of King
   Jeroboam withered, and who ate contrary to the command of God, [4833]
   immediately smitten? Strange that the lion which left the ass safe and
   sound should not spare the prophet just risen from his meal! He who,
   while he was fasting, had wrought miracles, no sooner ate a meal than
   he paid the penalty for the gratification. Joel also cries aloud:
   [4834] "Sanctify a fast, proclaim a time of healing," that it might
   appear that a fast is sanctified by other works, and that a holy fast
   avails for the cure of sin. Moreover, just as true virginity is not
   prejudiced by the counterfeit professions of the virgins of the devil,
   so neither is true fasting by the periodic fast and perpetual
   abstinence from certain kinds of food on the part of the worshippers of
   Isis and Cybele, particularly when a fast from bread is made up for by
   feasting on flesh. And just as the signs of Moses were imitated by the
   signs of the Egyptians which were in reality no signs at all, for the
   rod of Moses swallowed up the rods of the magicians: so when the devil
   tries to be the rival of God this does not prove that our religion is
   superstitious, but that we are negligent, since we refuse to do what
   even men of the world see clearly to be good.

   18. His fourth and last contention is that there are two classes, the
   sheep and the goats, the just and the unjust: that the just stand on
   the right hand, the other on the left: and that to the just the words
   are spoken: [4835] "Come, ye blessed of my Father, and inherit the
   kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." But that
   sinners are thus addressed: [4836] "Depart from me, ye cursed, into the
   eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels." That a
   good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor an evil tree good fruit.
   Hence it is that the Saviour says to the Jews: [4837] "Ye are of your
   father the devil, and the lusts of your father it is your will to do."
   He quotes the parable of the ten virgins, the wise and the foolish, and
   shows that the five who had no oil remained outside, but that the other
   five who had gotten for themselves the light of good works went into
   the marriage with the bridegroom. He goes back to the flood, and tells
   us that they who were righteous like Noah were saved, but that the
   sinners perished all together. We are informed that among the men of
   Sodom and Gomorrha no difference is made except between the two classes
   of the good and the bad. The righteous are delivered, the sinners are
   consumed by the same fire. There is one salvation for those who are
   released, one destruction for those who stay behind. Lot's wife is a
   clear warning that we must not deviate a hair's breadth from right. If,
   however, he says, you object and ask me why the righteous toils in time
   of peace, or in the midst of persecution, if he is to gain nothing nor
   have a greater reward, I would assert that he does this, not that he
   may gain a further reward but that he may not lose what he has already
   received. In Egypt also the ten plagues fell with equal violence upon
   all that sinned, and the same darkness hung over master and slave,
   noble and ignoble, the king and the people. Again at the Red Sea the
   righteous all passed over, the sinners were all overwhelmed. Six
   hundred thousand men, besides those who were unfit for war through age
   or sex, all alike fell in the desert, and two who were alike in
   righteousness are alike delivered. For forty years all Israel toiled
   and died alike. As regards food, an homer of manna was the measure for
   all ages: the clothes of all alike did not wear out: the hair of all
   alike did not grow, nor the beard increase: the shoes of all lasted the
   same time. Their feet grew not hard: the food in the mouths of all had
   the same taste. They went on their way to one resting place with equal
   toil and equal reward. All Hebrews had the same Passover, the same
   Feast of Tabernacles, the same Sabbath, the same New Moons. In the
   seventh, the Sabbatical Year, all prisoners were released without
   distinction of persons, and in the year of Jubilee all debts were
   forgiven to all debtors, and he who had sold land returned to the
   inheritance of his fathers.

   19. Then, again, as regards the parable of the sower in the Gospel, we
   read that the good ground brought forth fruit, some a hundred fold,
   some sixty fold, and some thirty fold; and, on the other hand, that the
   bad ground admitted of three degrees of sterility: but Jovinianus makes
   only two classes, the good soil and the bad. [4838] And as in one
   Gospel our Lord promises the Apostles a hundred fold, in another seven
   fold, for leaving children and wives, and in the world to come life
   eternal; and the seven and the hundred mean the same thing: so, too, in
   the passage before us, the numbers describing the fertility of the soil
   need not create any difficulty, particularly when the Evangelist Mark
   gives the inverse order, thirty, sixty, and a hundred. The Lord says,
   [4839] "He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood abideth in me,
   and I in him." As, then, there are not varying degrees of Christ's
   presence in us, so neither are there degrees of our abiding in Christ.
   [4840] "Every one that loveth me will keep my word: and my Father will
   love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him." He
   that is righteous, loves Christ: and if a man thus loves, the Father
   and the Son come to him, and make their abode with him. Now I suppose
   that when the guest is such as this the host cannot possibly lack
   anything. And if our Lord says, [4841] "In my Father's house are many
   mansions," His meaning is not that there are different mansions in the
   kingdom of heaven, but He indicates the number of Churches in the whole
   world, for though the Church be seven-fold she is but one. "I go," He
   says, "to prepare a place for you," not places. If this promise is
   peculiar to the twelve apostles, then Paul is shut out from that place,
   and the chosen vessel will be thought superfluous and unworthy. John
   and James, because they asked more than the others, did not obtain it;
   and yet their dignity is not diminished, because they were equal to the
   rest of the apostles. [4842] "Know ye not that your bodies are a temple
   of the Holy Ghost?" A temple, He says, not temples, in order to show
   that God dwells in all alike. [4843] "Neither for these only do I pray,
   but for them also that believe on me through their word; as thou,
   Father, in me, and I in thee, are one, so they may be all one in us.
   And the glory which thou hast given me I have given unto them. I have
   loved them, as thou hast loved me. And as we are Father, Son, and Holy
   Ghost, one God, so may they be one people in themselves, that is, like
   dear children, partakers of the divine nature." Call the Church what
   you will, bride, sister, mother, her assembly is but one and never
   lacks husband, brother, or son. Her faith is one, and she is not
   defiled by variety of doctrine, nor divided by heresies. She continues
   a virgin. Whithersoever the Lamb goeth, she follows Him: she alone
   knows the Song of Christ.

   20. "If you tell me," says he, "that one star differeth from another
   star in glory, I reply, that one star does differ from another star;
   that is, spiritual persons differ from carnal. We love all the members
   alike, and do not prefer the eye to the finger, nor the finger to the
   ear: but the loss of any one is attended by the sorrow of all the rest.
   We all alike come into this world, and we all alike depart from it.
   There is one Adam of the earth, and another from heaven. The earthly
   Adam is on the left hand, and will perish: the heavenly Adam is on the
   right hand, and will be saved. He who says to his brother, thou fool,'
   and raca,' will be in danger of Gehenna. And the murderer and the
   adulterer will likewise be sent into Gehenna. In times of persecution
   some are burnt, some strangled, some beheaded, some flee, or die within
   the walls of a prison: the struggle varies in kind, but the victors'
   crown is one. No difference was made between the son who had never left
   his father, and his brother who was welcomed as a returning penitent.
   To the labourers of the first hour, the third, the sixth, the ninth,
   and the eleventh, the same reward of a penny was given, and what may
   perhaps seem still more strange to you, the first to receive the reward
   were they who had toiled least in the vineyard."

   21. Who is there even of God's elect that would not be disturbed at
   these and similar passages of Holy Scripture which our crafty opponent,
   with a perverse ingenuity, twists to the support of his own views? The
   Apostle John says that many Antichrists had come, and to make no
   difference between John himself and the lowest penitent is the
   preaching of a real Antichrist. At the same time, I am amazed at the
   portentous forms which Jovinianus, as slippery as a snake and like
   another Proteus, so rapidly assumes. In sexual intercourse and full
   feeding he is an Epicurean; in the distribution of rewards and
   punishments he all at once becomes a Stoic, He exchanges Jerusalem for
   [4844] Citium, Judæa for Cyprus, Christ for Zeno. If we may not depart
   a hair's breadth from virtue, and all sins are equal, and a man who in
   a fit of hunger steals a piece of bread is no less guilty than he who
   slays a man: you must, in your turn, be held guilty of the greatest
   crimes. The case is different if you say that you have no sin, not even
   the least, and if, although all apostles and prophets and all the
   saints (as I have maintained in dealing with [4845] his second
   proposition) bewail their sinfulness, you alone boast of your
   righteousness. But a minute ago you were barefooted: now you not only
   wear shoes, but decorated ones. Just now you wore a rough coat and a
   dirty shirt, you were grimy, and haggard, and your hand was horny with
   toil: now you are clad in linen and silks, and strut like an exquisite
   in the fashions of the Atrebates and the Laodiceans. Your cheeks are
   ruddy, your skin sleek, your hair smoothed down in front and behind,
   your belly protrudes, your shoulders are little mountains, your neck
   full and so loaded with fat that the half-smothered words can scarce
   make their escape. Surely in such extremes of dress and mode of life
   there must be sin on the one side or the other. I will not assert that
   the sin lies in the food or clothing, but that such fickleness and
   changing for the worse is almost censurable in itself. And what we
   censure, is far removed from virtue; and what is far from virtue
   becomes the property of vice; and what is proved to be vicious is one
   with sin. Now sin, according to you, is placed on the left hand, and
   corresponds to the goats. You must, therefore, return to your old
   habits if you are to be a sheep on the right hand; or, if you
   perversely repent of your former views and change them for others,
   whether you like it or not, and although you shave off your beard, you
   will be reckoned among the goats.

   22. But what is the good of calling a [4846] one-eyed man Old One-eye,
   and of showing the inconsistency of an assailant, when we have to
   refute a whole series of statements? That the sheep and the goats on
   the right hand and on the left are the two classes of the righteous and
   the wicked, I do not deny. That a good tree does not bring forth evil
   fruit, nor an evil one good fruit, no one doubts. The ten virgins also,
   wise and foolish, we divide into good and bad. We are not ignorant that
   at the deluge the righteous were delivered, and sinners overwhelmed
   with the waters. That at Sodom and Gomorrha the just man was rescued,
   while the sinners were consumed by fire, is clear to everyone. We are
   also aware that Egypt was stricken with the ten plagues, and that
   Israel was saved. Even little children in our schools sing how the
   righteous passed through the Red Sea, and Pharaoh with his host was
   drowned. That six hundred thousand fell in the desert because they were
   unbelieving, and that two only entered the land of promise, is taught
   by Scripture; and so is the rest of your description of the two
   classes, good and bad, down to the labourers in the vineyard. But what
   are we to think of your assertion, that because there is a division
   into good and bad, the good, or the bad it may be, are not
   distinguished one from another, and that it makes no difference whether
   one is a ram in the flock or a poor little sheep? whether the sheep
   have the first or the second fleece? whether the flock is diseased and
   covered with the scab, or full of life and vigour? [4847] especially
   when by the authoritative utterances of His own prophet Ezekiel God
   clearly points out the difference between flock and flock of His
   rational sheep, saying, "Behold I judge between cattle and cattle, and
   between the rams and the he-goats, and between the fat cattle and the
   lean. Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed
   all the diseased with your horns, until they were scattered abroad."
   And that we might know what the cattle were, He immediately added:
   [4848] "Ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men." Will Paul and
   that penitent who had lain with his father's wife be on an equality,
   because the latter repented and was received into the Church: and shall
   the offender because he is with him on the right hand shine with the
   same glory as the Apostle? How is it then that tares and wheat grow
   side by side in the same field until the harvest, that is the end of
   the world? What is the significance of good and bad fish being
   contained in the Gospel net? Why, in Noah's ark, the type of the
   Church, are there different animals with different abodes according to
   their rank? Why standeth the queen upon the Lord's right hand, in
   raiment of wrought gold, in a vesture of gold? Why had Joseph,
   representing Christ, a coat of many colours? Why does the Apostle say
   to the Romans: [4849] "According as God had dealt to each man a measure
   of faith. For even as we have many members in one body, and all the
   members have not the same office: so we, who are many, are one body in
   Christ, and severally members one of another. And having gifts
   differing according to the grace that was given to us, whether
   prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of our faith; or
   ministry, let us give ourselves to our ministry; or he that teacheth,
   to his teaching; or he that exhorteth, to his exhorting: he that
   giveth, let him do it with liberality; he that ruleth, with diligence,"
   and so on. And elsewhere: [4850] "One man esteemeth one day above
   another: another esteemeth every day alike. Let every man be fully
   persuaded in his own mind." To the Corinthians he says: [4851] "I have
   planted, Apollos watered: but God gave the increase. So then, neither
   is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth: but God that
   giveth the increase. Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one:
   and every man shall receive his own reward according to his own labour.
   For we are labourers together with God, ye are God's husbandry, ye are
   God's building." And again elsewhere: [4852] "According to the grace of
   God which is given unto me, as a wise master-builder I laid a
   foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let each man take heed
   how he buildeth thereupon. For other foundation can no man lay, than
   that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. But if any man buildeth on
   the foundation, gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay, stubble: each
   man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall reveal it, because
   it is revealed in fire: and the fire itself shall prove each man's work
   of what sort it is. If any man's work shall abide which he built
   thereon, he shall receive a reward. If any man's work shall be burned,
   he shall suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as through
   fire." If the man whose work is burnt and is to suffer the loss of his
   labour, while he himself is saved, yet not without proof of fire: it
   follows that if a man's work remains which he has built upon the
   foundation, he will be saved without probation by fire, and
   consequently a difference is established between one degree of
   salvation and another. Again in another place he says: [4853] "Let a
   man so account of us, as of ministers of Christ, and stewards of the
   mysteries of God. Here, moreover, it is required in stewards, that a
   man be found faithful." Would you be assured that between one steward
   and another there is a great difference (I am not speaking of bad and
   good, but of the good themselves who stand on the right hand)? then
   listen to the sequel: [4854] "Know ye not that they which minister
   about the sacrifices, eat of the sacrifices, and they which wait upon
   the altar have their portion with the altar? Even so did the Lord
   ordain that they which proclaim the gospel should live of the gospel.
   But I have used none of these things: and I wrote not these things that
   it may be so done in my case: for it were good for me rather to die,
   than that any man should make my glorying void. For if I preach the
   gospel, I have nothing to glory of; for necessity is laid upon me; for
   woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel. For if I do this of mine own
   will, I have a reward: but if not of mine own will, I have a
   steward-ship intrusted to me. What then is my reward? That, when I
   preach the gospel, I may make the gospel without charge, so as not to
   use to the full my right in the gospel. For though I was free from all
   men, I brought myself under bondage to all, that I might gain the
   more." You surely cannot say that men commit sin by living by the
   Gospel, and partaking of the sacrifices. Of course not. The Lord
   himself made the rule that they who preach the Gospel, should live by
   the Gospel. But an Apostle who does not abuse this freedom, but labours
   with his hands that he may not be a burden to anyone, and toils night
   and day and ministers to his companions of course does this, that for
   his greater toil he may receive a greater reward.

   23. Let us hasten to what remains. [4855] "There are diversities of
   gifts, but the same Spirit. And there are diversities of ministrations,
   and the same Lord. And there are diversities of operations, but the
   same God who worketh all things in all. But to each one is given the
   manifestation of the Spirit to profit withal." And again: [4856] "As
   the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of the
   body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ." But he precludes
   you from saying that the different members of the one body have the
   same rank; for he immediately describes the orders of the Church, and
   says: [4857] "And God hath set some in the Church, first, apostles;
   secondly, prophets; thirdly, teachers; then miracles, then gifts of
   healings, helps, governments, divers kinds of tongues. Are all
   apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all workers of
   miracles? have all gifts of healings? do all speak with tongues? do all
   interpret? But desire earnestly the greater gifts. And a still more
   excellent way shew I unto you." And after discoursing more in detail of
   the graces of charity, he added: [4858] "Whether there be prophecies,
   they shall be done away; whether there be tongues, they shall cease;
   whether there be knowledge, it shall be done away. For we know in part,
   and we prophesy in part: but when that which is perfect is come, then
   that which is in part shall be done away." And afterwards we read:
   [4859] "But now abideth faith, hope, love, these three; and the
   greatest of these is love. Follow after love; yet desire earnestly
   spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy." And again: [4860] "I
   would have you all speak with tongues, but rather that ye should
   prophesy: and greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with
   tongues." And again: [4861] "I thank God, I speak with tongues more
   than you all." Where there are different gifts, and one man is greater,
   another less, and all are called spiritual, they are all certainly
   sheep, and they stand on the right hand; but there is a difference
   between one sheep and another. It is humility that leads the Apostle
   Paul to say: [4862] "I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet
   to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. But by
   the grace of God I am what I am: and his grace which was bestowed upon
   me was not found vain: but I laboured more abundantly than they all:
   yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me." But the very fact
   of his thus humbling himself shows the possibility of there being
   apostles of higher or lower rank, and God is not unjust that He will
   forget the work of him who is called the chosen vessel of election, and
   who laboured more abundantly than they all, or assign equal rewards to
   unequal deserts. Afterwards we read, [4863] "As in Adam all die, so
   also in Christ shall all be now alive. But each in his own order." If
   each is to rise in his own order, it follows that those who rise are of
   different degrees of merit. [4864] "All flesh is not the same flesh;
   but there is one flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another
   flesh of birds, and another of fishes. There are also celestial bodies,
   and bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the
   glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the sun, and
   another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star
   differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of
   the dead." Like a learned commentator, you have explained this passage
   by saying that the spiritual differ from the carnal. It follows that in
   heaven there will be both spiritual and carnal persons, and not only
   will the sheep climb thither, but your goats also. "One star," he says,
   "differeth from another star in glory": this is not the distinction of
   sheep and goat, but of sheep and sheep, star and star. Lastly, he says,
   "there is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon." But for
   this, you might maintain that the phrase one star from another star
   covers the whole human race; but he introduces the sun and moon, and
   you cannot possibly reckon them among the goats. "So," says he, "is
   also the resurrection of the dead"--the just will shine with the
   brightness of the sun, and those of the next rank will glow with the
   splendour of the moon, so that one will be a Lucifer, another an
   Arcturus, a third an Orion, another Mazzaroth, or some other of the
   stars whose names are hollowed in the book of Job. [4865] [4866] "For
   we all," he says, "must be made manifest before the judgment-seat of
   Christ; that each one may receive the things done in the body,
   according to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad." And you
   cannot say that the mode of our manifestation before the judgment-seat
   of Christ is such that the good receive good things, the bad evil
   things; for he [4867] teaches us in the same epistle that he who soweth
   sparingly shall reap also sparingly, and he that soweth bountifully
   shall reap also bountifully. Surely he who sows more and he who sows
   less are both on the right side. And although they belong to the same
   class, that of the sower, yet they differ in respect of measure and
   number. The same Paul, writing to the Ephesians, says: [4868] "to the
   intent that now unto the principalities and the powers in the heavenly
   places might be made known through the church the manifold wisdom of
   God." You observe that it is a varied and manifold wisdom of God which
   is spoken of as existing in the different ranks of the church. And in
   the same epistle we read, [4869] "Unto each one of us was the grace
   given according to the measure of the grace of Christ": not that
   Christ's measure varies, but only that so much of His grace is poured
   out as we can receive.

   24. In vain, therefore, do you multiply instances of sheep and goats,
   of the five wise and five foolish virgins, of Egyptians and Israelites,
   and so forth, because retribution is not in the present, but will be in
   the future. Hence we find that the day of judgment is promised at the
   end of all things, because the judgment is not now. For it would be
   absurd to call the last day the day of judgment, if God were judging at
   the present time. Now we sail the ship, wrestle, and fight, that at
   last we may reach the haven, be crowned, and triumph. But you, with no
   less adroitness than perversity, make the life of this world illustrate
   that of the world to come, although we know full well that here
   unrighteousness prevails, there, righteousness: [4870] "until we go
   into the sanctuary of God, and understand the end of those men." The
   saint does not die one way, the sinner another. Those who sail the same
   sea have the same calm and storm. A violent death is not one thing to
   the robber, another to the martyr. Children are not born one way of
   adultery and prostitution, in another of pure marriage. Certainly our
   Lord and the robbers incurred the same penalty of crucifixion. If the
   judgment of this world and of that which is to come be the same, it
   follows that they who were here crucified side by side, will also be
   esteemed of equal rank hereafter. Paul and they who bound him, sailed
   together, endured the same storm, escaped together to the shore when
   the ship was broken with the waves. You cannot deny that the prisoner
   and the keepers were of unequal merit. And what were the circumstances
   of that same shipwreck of the Apostle and the soldiers? The Apostle
   Paul afterwards [4871] related a vision, and said that they who were
   with him in the ship had been given to him by the Lord. Are we to
   suppose that he to whom they were given, and they who were given to
   him, were of one degree of merit? Ten righteous men can save a sinful
   city. Lot together with his daughters was delivered from the fire: his
   sons-in-law would also have been saved, had they been willing to leave
   the city. Now there was surely a great difference between Lot and his
   sons-in-law. One city out of the five, [4872] Zoar, was saved, and a
   place which lay under the same sentence as Sodom, Gomorrha, Admah, and
   Zeboiim, was preserved by the prayers of a holy man. Lot and Zoar were
   of different merit, but both of them escaped the fire. [4873] The
   robbers who in the absence of David had laid waste Ziklag, and made a
   prey of the wives and children of the inhabitants were slain on the
   third day in the plain, but forty men mounted on camels fled. Will you
   maintain that there was some difference between those who were slain
   and those who made good their escape? We read in the [4874] Gospel that
   the tower of Siloam fell upon eighteen men who perished in the ruins.
   Certainly our Saviour did not regard them as the only sinners: but they
   were punished to terrify the rest: it was like scourging a pestilent
   fellow to teach fools wisdom. If all sinners are punished alike, it is
   unjust for one to be slain while another is admonished by his comrade's
   death.

   25. You raise the objection that all Israelites had the same measure of
   manna, an homer, and were alike in respect of dress, and hair, and
   beard, and shoes; as though we did not all alike partake of the body of
   Christ. In the Christian mysteries there is one means of sanctification
   for the master and the servant, the noble and the low-born, for the
   king and his soldiers, and yet, that which is one varies according to
   the merits of those who receive it. [4875] "Whosoever shall eat or
   drink unworthily shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord."
   Does it follow that because Judas drank of the same cup as the rest of
   the apostles, that he and they are of equal merit? But suppose that we
   do not choose to receive the sacrament, at all events we all have the
   same life, breathe the same air, have the same blood in our veins, are
   fed on the same food. Moreover, if our viands are improved by culinary
   skill and are made more palatable for the consumer, food of this kind
   does not satisfy nature, but tickles the appetite. We are all alike
   subject to hunger, all alike suffer with cold: we alike are shrivelled
   with the frost, or melted with the broiling heat. The sun and the moon,
   and all the company of the stars, the showers, the whole world run
   their course for us all alike, and, as the Gospel tells us, the same
   refreshing rain falls upon all, good and bad, just and unjust. If the
   present is a picture of the future, then the Sun of Righteousness will
   rise upon sinners as well as upon the righteous, upon the wicked and
   the holy, upon the heathen as well as upon Jews and Christians, though
   the Scripture says, [4876] "Unto you that fear the Lord shall the Sun
   of Righteousness arise." If He will rise to those that fear, He will
   set to the despisers and the false prophets. The sheep which stand on
   the right hand will be brought into the kingdom of heaven, the goats
   will be thrust down to hell. The parable does not contrast the sheep
   one with another, or on the other hand the goats, but merely makes a
   difference between sheep and goats. The whole truth is not taught in a
   single passage: we must always bear in mind the exact point of an
   illustration. For instance, the ten virgins are not examples of the
   whole human race, but of the careful and the slothful: the former are
   ever anticipating the advent of our Lord, the latter abandon themselves
   to idle slumber without a thought of future judgment. And so at the end
   of the parable it is said, [4877] "Watch, for ye know not the day, nor
   the hour." If at the deluge Noah was delivered, and the whole world
   perished, all men were flesh, and therefore were destroyed. You must
   either say that the sons of Noah and Noah for whose sake they were
   delivered were of unequal merit, or you must place the accursed Ham in
   the same rank as his father because he was delivered with him from the
   flood. At the passion of Christ all wavered, all were unprofitable
   together: there was none that did good, no not one. Will you therefore
   dare to say that Peter and the rest of the Apostles who fled denied the
   Saviour in the same sense as Caiaphas and the Pharisees and the people
   who cried out, [4878] "Crucify him, crucify him"? And, to say no more
   about the Apostles, do you think Annas and Caiaphas, and Judas the
   traitor guilty of no greater crime than Pilate who was compelled
   against his will to give sentence against our Lord? The guilt of Judas
   is proportioned to his former merit, and the greater the guilt, the
   greater the penalty too. [4879] "For the mighty shall mightily suffer
   torment." An evil tree does not bear good fruit, nor a good tree evil
   fruit. If this be so, tell me how it was that Paul though he was an
   evil tree and persecuted the Church of Christ, afterwards bore good
   fruit? And Judas, though he was a good tree and wrought miracles like
   the other Apostles, afterwards turned traitor and brought forth evil
   fruit? The truth is that a good tree does not bear evil fruit, nor an
   evil tree good fruit, so long as they continue in their goodness, or
   badness. And if we read that every Hebrew keeps the same Passover, and
   that in [4880] the seventh year every prisoner is set free, and that at
   Jubilee, that is the fiftieth year, [4881] every possession returns to
   its owner, all this refers not to the present, but to the future; for
   being in bondage during the six days of this world, on the seventh day,
   the true and eternal Sabbath, we shall be free, at any rate if we wish
   to be free while still in bondage in the world. If, however, we do not
   desire it, our ear will be bored in token of our disobedience, and
   together with our wives and children, whom we preferred to liberty,
   that is, with the flesh and its works, we shall be in perpetual
   slavery.

   26. As for the parable of the sower which makes both good and bad
   ground bear a triple crop, and the passage from the apostle in which
   upon Christ as the foundation one man builds gold, silver, costly
   stones, another wood, hay, stubble, the meaning is perfectly clear. We
   know that in a great house there are different vessels, and to wish to
   contradict so plain a truth would be sheer impudence. Yet that
   Jovinianus may not triumph in a lie and quote the instance of the
   apostles by way of discrediting the hundred fold, sixty fold, and
   thirty fold, let me inform him that in [4882] Matthew and Mark a
   hundred fold is promised to the apostles who had left all. And I would
   tell him further, that in the Gospel of Luke we find much more, that is
   polu pleiona, and that there is absolutely no instance in the Gospels
   of a hundred standing for seven; and that he is convicted either of
   forgery, or of ignorance; and that our cause is not prejudiced by the
   fact that in one Gospel the enumeration begins at a hundred, in another
   at thirty, since it is a rule with all Scripture, and especially with
   the older writings, to put the lowest number first and so ascend by
   degrees to the higher. For instance, suppose one to say that so-and-so
   lived five and seventy and a hundred years, it does not follow that
   five and seventy are more than a hundred because they were first
   mentioned. If you do not on the side of good admit the difference
   between a hundred, sixty, and thirty, neither will you do so on the
   side of evil, and the seed which fell by the wayside, upon the rock,
   and among thorns, will be equally faulty. But if the former three, or
   the latter three, on the side of good, or on the side of evil
   respectively, are one and the same, it was foolish instead of speaking
   of two things to enumerate six kinds, and all the more because
   according to the account of the parable in Matthew, Mark, and Luke, the
   Saviour always added: "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." Where
   there is no deep inner meaning, it is useless to draw our attention to
   the mystic sense.

   27. You give it as your opinion that, since the Father and the Son make
   their abode with the faithful, and since Christ is their guest, nothing
   is lacking. I suppose, however, that Christ's abiding with the
   Corinthians was one thing, with the Ephesians another: it was one
   thing, I say, for Him to abide with those whom Paul blamed for many
   sins, another for Him to dwell with those to whom the apostle revealed
   mysteries hidden from the beginning of the world; one thing for Him to
   be in Titus and Timothy, another in Paul. Certainly amongst them that
   have been born of women, there has not arisen a greater than John the
   Baptist. But the term greater implies others who are less. And [4883]
   "he who is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he." You see
   then that in heaven one is greatest and another is least, and that
   among the angels and the invisible creation there is a manifold and
   infinite diversity. Why do the apostles say: [4884] "Lord, increase our
   faith," if there is one measure for all? And why did our Lord rebuke
   His disciple, saying: [4885] "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst
   thou doubt?" In Jeremiah also we read concerning the future kingdom:
   [4886] "Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new
   covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah not
   according to the covenant that I made with their fathers." And so on
   after: [4887] "I will put my law in their inward parts, and in their
   heart will I write it; and I will be their God and they shall be my
   people: and they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every
   man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know me,
   from the least of them unto the greatest of them." The context of this
   passage clearly shows that the prophet is describing the future
   kingdom, and how can there possibly be in it a least or greatest, if
   all are to be equal? The secret is disclosed in the Gospel: [4888]
   "Whosoever shall do and teach, he shall be called great in the kingdom
   of heaven: but whosoever shall teach, and not do, shall be least."
   [4889] The Saviour taught us at a feast to take the lowest place, lest,
   when one greater than us came, we should be thrust with disgrace from
   the higher place. If we cannot fall, but only raise ourselves by
   penitence, what is the meaning of the ladder at Bethel, on which the
   angels come from heaven to earth and descend as well as ascend? Surely
   while on that ladder they are reckoned among the sheep and stand on the
   right hand. There are angels who descend from heaven; but Jovinianus is
   sure that they retain their inheritance.

   28. But when Jovinianus supposes that the many mansions in our Father's
   house are churches scattered throughout the world, who can refrain from
   laughing; since Scripture plainly teaches in John's Gospel that our
   Lord was discoursing not of the number of the churches, but of the
   heavenly mansions, and the eternal tabernacles for which the prophet
   longed? [4890] "In my Father's house," He says, "are many mansions: if
   it were not so, I would have told you; for I go to prepare a place for
   you. And if I go and prepare a place for you I will come again, and
   will receive you unto myself, that where I am, there ye may be also."
   The place and the mansions which Christ says He would prepare for the
   apostles are of course in the Father's house, that is, in the kingdom
   of heaven, not on earth, where for the present He was leading the
   apostles. And at the same time regard must be had to the sense of
   Scripture: "I might tell you," He says, "that I go to prepare a place
   for you, if there were not many mansions in my Father's house, that is
   to say, if each individual did not prepare for himself a mansion
   through his own works rather than receive it through the bounty of God.
   The preparation is therefore not mine, but yours." This view is
   supported by the fact that it profited Judas nothing to have a place
   prepared, since he lost it by his own fault. And we must interpret in
   the same way what our Lord says to the sons of Zebedee, one of whom
   wished to sit on His left hand, the other on His right: [4891] "My cup
   indeed ye shall drink: but to sit on my right hand, and on my left
   hand, is not mine to give, but it is for them for whom it hath been
   prepared of my Father." It is not the Son's to give; how then is it the
   Father's to prepare? There are, He says, prepared in heaven, many
   different mansions, destined for many different virtues, and they will
   be awarded not to persons, but to persons' works. In vain therefore do
   you ask of me what rests with yourselves, a reward which my Father has
   prepared for those whose virtues will entitle them to rise to such
   dignity. Again when He says: [4892] "I will come again, and will
   receive you unto myself: that where I am, there ye may be also," He is
   speaking especially to the apostles, concerning whom it is elsewhere
   written, "That as I and thou, Father, are one, so they also may be one
   in us," inasmuch as they have believed, have been perfected, and can
   say, [4893] "the Lord is my portion." If, however, there are not many
   mansions, how is it taught in the Old Testament correspondingly with
   the New, that the chief priest has one rank, the priests another, the
   Levites another, the door-keepers another, the sacristans another? How
   is it that in the [4894] book of Ezekiel, where a description is given
   of the future Church and of the heavenly Jerusalem, the priests who
   have sinned are degraded to the rank of sacristans and doorkeepers, and
   although they are in the temple of God, that is on the right hand, they
   are not among the rams, but among the poorest of the sheep? How again
   is it that in the river which flows from the temple, and replenishes
   the salt sea, and gives new life to everything, we read there are many
   kinds of fish? Why do we read that in the kingdom of heaven there are
   Archangels, Angels, Thrones, Dominions, Powers, Cherubim and Seraphim,
   and every name which is named, not only in this present world, but also
   that which is to come? A difference of name is meaningless where there
   is not a difference of rank. An Archangel is of course an Archangel to
   other inferior angels, and Powers, and Dominions have other spheres
   over which they exercise authority. This is what we find in heaven and
   in the administration of God. You must not therefore smile and sneer at
   us, as is your wont, for making a graduated series of emperors,
   præfects and counts, tribunes and centurions, companies, and all the
   other steps in the service.

   29. It is mere trifling to quote the passage: [4895] "Know ye not that
   your bodies are a temple of the Holy Ghost," for it is customary in
   Holy Scripture to speak of a single object as though it were many, and
   of many as though they were one. And Jovinianus himself should know
   that even in a temple there are many divisions--the outer and the inner
   courts, the vestibules, the holy place, and the Holy of Holies. There
   are also in a temple kitchens, pantries, oil-cellars, and cupboards for
   the vessels. And so in the temple of our body there are different
   degrees of merit. God does not dwell in all alike, nor does He impart
   Himself to all in the same degree. A portion of the spirit of Moses was
   taken and given to the seventy elders. I suppose there is a difference
   between the abundance of the river, and that of the rivulets. [4896]
   Elijah's spirit was given in double measure to Elisha, and thus double
   grace wrought greater miracles. Elijah while living restored a dead man
   to life; Elisha after death did the same. Elijah invoked famine on the
   people; Elisha in a single day put the enemy's forces in the power of
   the city which they besieged. No doubt the words, "Know ye not that
   your bodies are a temple of the Holy Ghost," refer to the whole
   assembly of the faithful, who, joined together, make up the one body of
   Christ. But the question now is, who in the body is worthy to be the
   feet of Christ, and who the head? who is His eye, and who His hand?--a
   distinction indicated by the [4897] two women in the Gospel, the
   penitent and the holy woman, one of whom held His feet, the other His
   head. Some authorities, however, think there was only one woman, and
   that she who began at His feet gradually advanced to His head.
   Jovinianus further urges against us our Lord's words, [4898] "I pray
   not for these only, but also for those who shall believe on me through
   their word: that as I, Father, in thee and thou in me are one, so they
   all may be one in us," and reminds us that the whole Christian people
   is one in God, and, as His well-beloved sons, are [4899] "partakers of
   the divine nature." We have already said, and the truth must now be
   inculcated more in detail, that we are not one in the Father and the
   Son according to nature, but according to grace. For the essence of the
   human soul and the essence of God are not the same, as the Manichæans
   constantly assert. But, says our Lord: [4900] "Thou hast loved them as
   thou hast loved me." You see, then, that we are privileged to partake
   of His essence, not in the realm of nature, but of grace, and the
   reason why we are beloved of the Father is that He has loved the Son;
   and the members are loved, those namely of the body. [4901] "For as
   many as received Christ, to them gave He power to become sons of God,
   even to them that believe on His name: which were born not of blood,
   nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God." The
   Word was made flesh that we might pass from the flesh into the Word.
   The Word did not cease to be what He had been; nor did the human nature
   lose that which it was by birth. The glory was increased, the nature
   was not changed. Do you ask how we are made one body with Christ? Your
   creator shall be your instructor: [4902] "He that eateth my flesh and
   drinketh my blood abideth in me, and I in him. As the living Father
   sent me, and I live because of the Father, so he that eateth me, he
   also shall live because of me. This is the bread which came down out of
   heaven." But the Evangelist John, who had drunk in wisdom from the
   breast of Christ, agrees herewith, and says: [4903] "Hereby know we
   that we abide in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his
   Spirit. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God
   abideth in him, and he in God." If you believe in Christ, as the
   apostles believed, you shall be made one body with them in Christ. But,
   if it is rash for you to claim for yourself a faith and works like
   theirs when you have not the same faith and works, you cannot have the
   same place.

   30. You repeat the words bride, sister, mother, and affirm that all
   these are titles of the one Church and names applied to all believers.
   The fact goes against you. For if the Church admits but one rank, and
   has not many members in one body, what necessity is there for calling
   her bride, sister, mother? It must be that she is the bride of some,
   the sister of others, the mother of others. All indeed stand on the
   right hand, but one stands as a bridegroom, another as a brother, a
   third as a son. [4904] "My little children" says the Apostle, "of whom
   I am again in travail until Christ be formed in you." Do you think that
   the children who are being born and the apostle who is in travail are
   of equal rank? And the folly of your contention that we love all the
   members alike, and do not prefer the eye to the finger, nor the hand to
   the ear, but that if one be lost all mourn, is proved by the lesson
   which the apostle teaches the Corinthians: [4905] "Some members are
   more honourable, others excite the sense of shame: and those parts to
   which shame attaches are clothed with more abundant honour; whereas our
   comely parts have no need of our care." Do you think that the mouth and
   the belly, the eyes and the outlets of the body are to be classed
   together as of equal merit? [4906] "The lamp of thy body," he says, "is
   thine eye. If thine eye be blinded, thy whole body is in darkness." If
   you cut off a finger, or the tip of the ear, there is indeed pain, but
   the loss is not so great, nor is the disfigurement attended by so much
   pain as it would be were you to take out the eyes, mutilate the nose,
   or saw through a bone. Some members we can dispense with and yet live:
   without others life is an impossibility. Some offences are light, some
   heavy. It is one thing to owe ten thousand talents, another to owe a
   farthing. We shall have to give account of the idle word no less than
   of adultery; but it is not the same thing to be put to the blush, and
   to be put upon the rack, to grow red in the face and to ensure lasting
   torment. Do you think I am merely expressing my own views? Hear what
   the Apostle John says: [4907] "He who knows that his brother sinneth a
   sin not unto death, let him ask, and he shall give him life, even to
   him that sinneth not unto death. But he that hath sinned unto death,
   who shall pray for him?" You observe that if we entreat for smaller
   offences, we obtain pardon: if for greater ones, it is difficult to
   obtain our request: and that there is a great difference between sins.
   And so with respect to the people of Israel who had sinned a sin unto
   death, it is said to Jeremiah: [4908] "Pray not thou for this people,
   neither entreat for them, and do not withstand me, for I will not hear
   thee." Moreover, if it be true that we all alike enter the world and
   all alike leave it, and this is a precedent for the world to come, it
   follows that whether righteous or sinners we shall all be equally
   esteemed by God, because the conditions of our birth and death are now
   the same. And if you contend that there are two Adams, the one of the
   earth, the other from heaven; and that they who were in the earthly
   Adam stand on the left hand, those who were in the heavenly are on the
   right hand, before we go further, let me ask you a question concerning
   two brothers: Was Esau in the earthly Adam, or in the heavenly? No one
   doubts that you will reply, he was in the earthly. In which was Jacob?
   Without hesitation you will say, in the heavenly. How then was he in
   the heavenly when Christ had not yet come in the flesh--Christ who is
   called the second Adam from heaven? You must either reckon all before
   the incarnation of Christ in the old Adam, and even the just in the man
   from the earth, and then they will be on the left among your goats; or,
   if it be impious to give Isaac the same place as Ishmael, Jacob as
   Esau, the saints as sinners, the last Adam will date from the time when
   Christ was born of a Virgin, and your argument from the two Adams will
   not benefit your sheep and goats, because we have proved that in the
   first Adam there were both sheep and goats, and that of those who were
   in one and the same man, some stood on the right hand of God, others on
   the left: [4909] "For from Adam even until Moses death reigned over
   all, even over them that had not sinned after the likeness of Adam's
   transgression."

   31. As regards your attempt to show that railing and murder, the use of
   the expression raca and adultery, the idle word and godlessness, are
   rewarded with the same punishment, I have already given you my reply,
   and will now briefly repeat it. You must either deny that you are a
   sinner if you are not to be in danger of Gehenna: or, if you are a
   sinner you will be sent to hell for even a light offence: [4910] "The
   mouth that lieth," says one, "kills the soul." I suspect that you, like
   other men, have occasionally told a lie: [4911] for all men are liars,
   that God alone may be true, [4912] and that He may be justified in His
   words, and may prevail when He judges. It follows either that you will
   not be a man lest you be found a liar: or if you are a man and are
   consequently a liar, you will be punished with parricides and
   adulterers. For you admit no difference between sins, and the gratitude
   of those whom you raise from the mire and set on high will not equal
   the rage against you of those whom for the trifling offences of daily
   life you have thrust into utter darkness. And if it be so that in a
   persecution one is stifled, another beheaded, another flees, or the
   fourth dies within the walls of a prison, and one crown of victory
   awaits various kinds of struggle, the fact tells in our favour. For in
   martyrdom it is the will, which gives occasion to the death, that is
   crowned. My duty is to resist the frenzy of the heathen, and not deny
   the Lord. It rests with them either to behead, or to burn, or to shut
   up in prison, or enforce various other penalties. But if I escape, and
   die in solitude, there will not at my death be the same crown for me as
   for them, because the confession of Christ will not have been to me as
   to them the cause of death. As for your remark that absolutely no
   difference was made between the brother who had always been with his
   father, and him who was afterwards welcomed as a penitent, I am willing
   to add, if you like, that the one drachma which was lost and was found
   was put with the others, and that the one sheep which the good
   shepherd, leaving the ninety and nine, sought and brought back, made up
   the full tale of a hundred. But it is one thing to be a penitent, and
   with tears sue for pardon, another to be always with the father. And so
   both the shepherd and the father say by the mouth of Ezekiel to the
   sheep that was carried back, and to the son that was lost, [4913] "And
   I will establish my covenant with thee; and thou shalt know that I am
   the Lord: that thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open
   thy mouth ever more, because of thy shame, when I have forgiven thee
   all that thou hast done." That penitents may have their due it is
   enough for them to feel shame instead of all other punishment. Hence in
   another place it is said to them, [4914] "Then shall ye remember your
   evil ways, and all the crimes wherewith ye were defiled, and ye shall
   loathe yourselves in your own sight for all the wickedness that ye have
   done; and ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall have done you
   good for my name's sake, and not according to your evil ways, nor
   according to your evil doings." The son, moreover, was reproved by his
   father for envying his brother's deliverance, and for being tormented
   by jealousy while the angels in heaven were rejoicing. The parallel,
   however, is not to be drawn between the merits of the two sons (one of
   whom was temperate, the other a prodigal) and those of the whole human
   race, but the characters depicted are either Jews and Christians, or
   saints and penitents. In the lifetime of Bishop Damasus I dedicated to
   him a small treatise upon this parable. [4915]

   32. And if a penny was given to all the labourers, those of the first,
   the third, the sixth, the ninth, and the eleventh hours, and they came
   first for the reward who were the last to work in the vineyard, even
   here the persons described do not belong to one time or one age, but
   from the beginning of the world to the end of it there are different
   calls and a special meaning attaches to each. Abel and Seth were called
   at the first hour: Enoch and Noah at the third: Abraham, Isaac, and
   Jacob at the sixth: Moses and the prophets at the ninth: at the
   eleventh the Gentiles, to whom the recompense was first given because
   they believed on the crucified Lord, and inasmuch as it was hard for
   them to believe they earned a great reward. Many kings and prophets
   have desired to see the things that we see, and have not seen them. But
   the one penny does not represent one reward, but one life, and one
   deliverance from Gehenna. And as by the favour of the sovereign those
   guilty of various crimes are released from prison, and each one,
   according to his toil and exertions, is in this or that condition of
   life, so too the penny, as it were by the favour of our Sovereign, is
   the discharge from prison of us all by baptism. Now our work is,
   according to our different virtues, to prepare for ourselves a
   different future.

   33. So far I have replied to the separate portions of his argument; I
   shall now address myself to the general question. Our Lord says to his
   disciples, [4916] "Whosoever would become great among you, let him be
   least of all." If we are all to be equal in heaven, in vain do we
   humble ourselves here that we may be greater there. Of the two debtors
   who owed, one five hundred pence, the other fifty, he to whom most was
   forgiven loved most. And so the Saviour says, [4917] "I say to you, her
   sins which are many are forgiven her, for she hath loved much. But to
   whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little." He who loves little,
   and has little forgiven, he will of course be of inferior rank. [4918]
   The householder when he set out delivered to his servants his goods, to
   one five talents, to another two, to another one, to each according to
   his ability. Just as in another Gospel it is written that a nobleman
   setting out for a far country to receive for himself a kingdom and
   return, called the servants, and gave them each a sum of money, with
   which one gained ten pounds, another five, and they, each according to
   his ability and the gain he had made, received ten or five cities. But
   one who had received a talent, or a pound, buried it in the ground, or
   tied it up in a napkin, and kept it until his master's return. Our
   first thought is that if, according to the modern Zeno, the righteous
   do not toil in hope of reward, but to avoid the loss of what they
   already have, he who buried his pound or talent that he might not lose
   it, did no wrong, and the caution of him who kept his money is worthy
   of more praise than the fruitless toil of those who wore themselves out
   and yet received no reward for their labour. Then observe that the very
   talent which was taken from the timid or negligent servant, was not
   given to him who had the smaller profit, but to him who had gained the
   most, that is, to him who had been placed over ten cities. If
   difference of rank is not constituted by the difference in number, why
   did our Lord say, "He gave to everyone according to his ability"? If
   the gain of five talents and ten talents is the same, why were not ten
   cities given to him who gained the least, and five to him who gained
   the most? But that our Lord is not satisfied with what we have, but
   always desires more, He himself shows by saying, "Wherefore didst thou
   not give my money to the money-changers, that so when I came I might
   have received it with usury?" The Apostle Paul understood this, and
   [4919] forgetting those things which were behind, reached forward to
   those things which were in front, that is, he made daily progress, and
   did not keep the grace given to him carefully wrapped up in a napkin,
   but his spirit, like the capital of a keen man of business, was renewed
   from day to day, and if he were not always growing larger, he thought
   himself growing less. Six cities of refuge are mentioned in the law,
   provided for fugitives who were involuntary homicides, and the cities
   themselves belonged to the priests. I should like to ask whether you
   would put those fugitives among your goats, or among our sheep. If they
   were goats, they would be slain like other homicides, and would not
   enter the cities of God's ministers. If you say they were sheep, they
   will not possibly be such sheep as can enjoy full liberty and feed
   without fear of wolves. And it will be plain to you that sheep indeed
   they are, but wandering sheep: that they are on the right hand, but do
   not stand there: they flee until the High Priest dies and descending
   into hell liberates their souls. The Gibeonites met the children of
   Israel, and although other nations were slaughtered, they were kept
   [4920] for hewers of wood and drawers of water. [4921] And of such
   value were they in God's eyes, that the family of Saul was destroyed
   for the wrong done to them. Where would you put them? Among the goats?
   But they were not slain, and they were avenged by the determination of
   God. Among the sheep? But holy Scripture says they were not of the same
   merit as the Israelites. You see then that they do indeed stand on the
   right hand, but are of a far inferior grade. Jonathan came between
   David, the holy man, and Saul, the worst of kings, and we can neither
   place him among the kids because he was worthy of a prophet's love, nor
   amongst the rams lest we make him equal to David, and particularly when
   we know that he was slain. He will, therefore, be among the sheep, but
   low down. And just as in the case of David and Jonathan, you will be
   bound to recognize differences between sheep and sheep. [4922] "That
   servant, which knew his lord's will, and made not ready, nor did
   according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes; but he that
   knew not, and did things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
   stripes. And to whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be
   required: and to whom they commit much, of him will they ask the more."
   Lo! more or less is committed to different servants, and according to
   the nature of the trust, as well as of the sin, is the number of
   stripes inflicted.

   34. The whole account of the land of Judah and of the tribes is typical
   of the church in heaven. Let us read Joshua the son of Nun, or the
   concluding portions of Ezekiel, and we shall see that the historical
   division of the land as related by the one finds a counterpart in the
   spiritual and heavenly promises of the other. What is the meaning of
   the seven and eight steps in the description of the temple? or again,
   what significance attaches to the fact that in the Psalter, after being
   taught the mystic alphabet by the [4923] one hundred and eighteenth
   psalm we arrive by fifteen steps at the point where we can sing: [4924]
   "Behold, now bless the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord: ye who stand
   in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God." Why
   did [4925] two tribes and a half dwell on the other side of Jordan, a
   district abounding in cattle, while the remaining nine tribes and a
   half either drove out the old inhabitants from their possessions, or
   dwelt with them? Why did the tribe of Levi [4926] receive no portion in
   the land, but have the Lord for their portion? And how is it that of
   the priests and Levites, themselves, the [4927] high priest alone
   entered the Holy of Holies where were the cherubim and the mercy-seat?
   Why did the other priests wear [4928] linen raiment only, and not have
   their clothing of wrought gold, blue, scarlet, purple, and fine cloth?
   The priests and [4929] Levites of the lower order took care of the oxen
   and wains: those of the higher order carried the ark of the Lord on
   their shoulders. If you do away with the gradations of the tabernacle,
   the temple, the Church, if, to use a common military phrase, all upon
   the right hand are to be "up to the same standard," bishops are to no
   purpose, priests in vain, deacons useless. Why do virgins persevere?
   widows toil? Why do married women practise continence? Let us all sin,
   and when once we have repented, we shall be on the same footing as the
   apostles.

   35. But now we have just sighted land: the foaming billows have been
   rolling mountain-high: our ship has been borne aloft, or has rushed
   headlong into the depths beneath: little by little the haven opens to
   the view of the weary and exhausted sailors. We have discussed the
   married, widows, and virgins. We have preferred virginity to widowhood,
   widowhood to marriage. The passage of the apostle, in which he treats
   questions of this kind, has been expounded, and particular objections
   have been met. We also took a survey of secular literature, and
   inquired what was thought of virgins, and what of those who had one
   husband; and by way of contrast we pointed out the cares which
   sometimes attend wedlock. Then we passed to the second division, in
   which our opponent denies the possibility of sinning to those who have
   been baptized with complete faith. And we showed that God alone is
   faultless, and every creature is at fault, not because all have sinned,
   but because all may sin, and those who stand have cause to fear when
   they see the fall of men like themselves. In the third place we came to
   fasting, and inasmuch as our opponent's argument fell under two heads,
   and he appealed either to philosophy, or to Holy Scripture, we also
   furnished a several reply. In the fourth, that is the last section, the
   sheep and goats on the right hand and the left, the righteous and the
   wicked, were distributed into two classes, the intention being to show
   that there is no difference between one just man and another, or
   between one sinner and another. To prove the point Jovinianus had
   accumulated countless instances from Scripture which apparently
   favoured his view, and this contention we rebutted both by arguments
   and illustrations from Scripture, and pulverized Zeno's old opinion no
   less with common sense than with the words of inspiration.

   36. I must in conclusion say a few words to our modern Epicurus
   wantoning in his gardens with his favourites of both sexes. On your
   side are the fat and the sleek in their festal attire. If I may mock
   like Socrates, add if you please, all swine and dogs, and, since you
   like flesh so well, vultures too, eagles, hawks, and owls. We shall
   never be afraid of the host of [4930] Aristippus. If ever I see a fine
   fellow, or a man who is no stranger to the curling-irons, with his hair
   nicely done and his cheeks all aglow, he belongs to your herd, or
   rather grunts in concert with your pigs. To our flock belong the sad,
   the pale, the meanly clad, who, like strangers in this world, though
   their tongues are silent, yet speak by their dress and bearing. [4931]
   "Woe is me," say they, "that my sojourning is prolonged! that I dwell
   among the tents of Kedar!" that is to say, in the darkness of this
   world, for the light shineth in the darkness, and the darkness
   comprehended it not. Boast not of having many disciples. The Son of God
   taught in Judæa, and only twelve apostles followed Him. [4932] "I have
   trodden the wine-press alone," He says, "and of the peoples there was
   no man with me." At the passion He was left alone, and even Peter's
   fidelity to Him wavered: on the other hand all the people applauded the
   doctrine of the Pharisees, saying, [4933] "Crucify him, crucify him. We
   have no king but Cæsar," that is in effect, we follow vice, not virtue;
   Epicurus, not Christ; Jovinianus, not the Apostle Paul. If many assent
   to your views, that only indicates voluptuousness; for they do not so
   much approve your utterances, as favour their own vices. In our crowded
   thoroughfares a false prophet may be seen any day stick in hand
   belabouring the fools about him, and knocking out the teeth of those
   who offend him, and yet he never lacks constant followers. And do you
   regard it as a mark of great wisdom if you have a following of many
   pigs, whom you are feeding to make pork for hell? Since you published
   your views, and set the mark of your approval on baths in which the
   sexes bathe together, the impatience which once threw over burning lust
   the semblance of a robe of modesty has been laid bare and exposed. What
   was once hidden is now open to the gaze of all. You have revealed your
   disciples, such as they are, not made them. One result of your teaching
   is that sin is no longer even repented of. Your virgins whom, with a
   depth of wisdom never found before in speech or writing, you have
   taught the apostle's maxim that it is better to marry than to burn,
   have turned secret adulterers into acknowledged husbands. [4934] It was
   not the apostle, the chosen vessel, who gave this advice; it was
   Virgil's widow:

   [4935] "She calls it wedlock; thus she veils her fault."

   37. About four hundred years have passed since the preaching of Christ
   flashed upon the world, and during that time in which His robe has been
   torn by countless heresies, almost the whole body of error has been
   derived from the Chaldæan, Syriac, and Greek languages. Basilides, the
   master of licentiousness and the grossest sensuality, after the lapse
   of so many years, and like a second [4936] Euphorbus, was changed by
   transmigration into Jovinian, so that the Latin tongue might have a
   heresy of its own. Was there no other province in the whole world to
   receive the gospel of pleasure, and into which the serpent might
   insinuate itself, except that which was founded by the teaching of
   Peter, upon the rock Christ? Idol temples had fallen before the
   standard of the Cross and the severity of the Gospel: now on the
   contrary lust and gluttony endeavour to overthrow the solid structure
   of the Cross. And so God says by Isaiah, [4937] "O my people, they
   which bless you cause you to err, and trouble the paths of your feet."
   Also by Jeremiah, [4938] "Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and save
   every man his life, and believe not the false prophets which say,
   Peace, peace, and there is no peace;" who are always repeating, [4939]
   "The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord." "Thy prophets have
   seen for thee false and foolish things; they have not laid bare thine
   iniquity that they might call thee to repentance: who devour God's
   people like bread: they have not called upon God." Jeremiah announced
   the captivity and was stoned by the people. [4940] Hananiah, the son of
   Azzur, broke the bars of wood for the present, but was preparing bars
   of iron for the future. False prophets always promise pleasant things,
   and please for a time. Truth is bitter, and they who preach it are
   filled with bitterness. For with the unleavened bread of sincerity and
   truth the Lord's passover is kept, and it is eaten with bitter herbs.
   Admirable are your utterances and worthy of the ears of the bride of
   Christ standing in the midst of her virgins, and widows, and celibates!
   (their very name is [4941] derived from the fact that they who abstain
   from intercourse are fit for heaven). This is what you say: "Fast
   seldom, marry often. You cannot do the work of marriage unless you take
   mead, and flesh, and solid food. For lust strength is required. Flesh
   is soon spent and enervated. You need not be afraid of fornication. He
   who has been once baptized into Christ cannot fall, for he has the
   consolation of marriage to slake his lust. And if you do fall,
   repentance will restore you, and you who were hypocrites at baptism may
   have a firm faith in your repentance. Be not disturbed by the thought
   of a difference between the righteous and the penitent, and do not
   imagine that pardon even gives a lower place; rather believe that it
   takes away your crown. For there is one reward: he who stands on the
   right hand shall enter into the kingdom of heaven." Through counsels
   such as these your swine-herds are richer than our shepherds, and the
   he-goats draw after them many of the other sex: [4942] "They were as
   fed horses: they were mad after women": they no sooner see a woman than
   they neigh after her, and, shame to say! find scriptural authority for
   the consolation of their incontinence. But the very women, unhappy
   creatures! though they deserve no pity, who chant the words of their
   instructor (for what does God require of them but to become mothers?),
   have lost not only their chastity, but all sense of shame, and defend
   their licentious practices with an access of impudence. You have,
   moreover, in your army many subalterns, you have your guardsmen and
   your skirmishers at the outposts, the round-bellied, the well-dressed,
   the exquisites, and noisy orators, to defend you with tooth and nail.
   The noble make way for you, the wealthy print kisses on your face. For
   unless you had come, the drunkard and the glutton could not have
   entered paradise. All honor to your virtue, or rather to your vices!
   You have in your camp, even amazons with uncovered breasts, bare arms
   and knees, who challenge the men who come against them to a battle of
   lust. Your household is a large one, and so in your aviaries not only
   turtle-doves, but hoopoes are fed, which may wing their flight over the
   whole field of rank debauchery. Pull me to pieces and scatter me to the
   winds: tax me with what offences you please: accuse me of luxurious and
   delicate living: you would like me better if I were guilty, for I
   should belong to your herd.

   38. But I will now address myself to you, great Rome, who with the
   confession of Christ have blotted out the blasphemy written on your
   forehead. Mighty city, mistress-city of the world, city of the
   Apostle's praises, shew the meaning of your name. Rome is either
   strength in Greek, or height in Hebrew. Lose not the excellence your
   name implies: let virtue lift you up on high, let not voluptuousness
   bring you low. By repentance, as the history of Nineveh proves, you may
   escape the curse wherewith the Saviour threatened you in the
   Apocalypse. Beware of the name of Jovinianus. It is derived from that
   of an idol. [4943] The Capitol is in ruins: the temples of Jove with
   their ceremonies have perished. Why should his name and vices flourish
   now in the midst of you, when even in the time of Numa Pompilius, even
   under the sway of kings, your ancestors gave a heartier welcome to the
   self-restraint of Pythagoras than they did under the consuls to the
   debauchery of Epicurus?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4652] This, according to i. 3, is "cannot be overthrown."

   [4653] 1 John iii. 9, 10.

   [4654] 1 John v. 18.

   [4655] 1 John v. 21.

   [4656] 1 John i. 8 sq.

   [4657] Is. lxv. 5. Quoted from memory. The LXX and Vulg. have like A.V.
   and Rev., "Come not near me."

   [4658] 1 John ii. 1.

   [4659] 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15.

   [4660] Ps. li. 12.

   [4661] 1 John ii. 4.

   [4662] 1 John xiv. 6.

   [4663] James ii. 26.

   [4664] Jerome is perhaps hinting at the opinions of Jovinianus, that
   there was no other distinction between men than the grand division into
   righteous and wicked, and drawing from this the inference that whoever
   had been truly baptized had nothing further to gain by progress in the
   Christian life.

   [4665] 1 Peter ii. 22.

   [4666] James iii. 2.

   [4667] Job xiv. 4, 5, Sept.

   [4668] Prov. xx. 9.

   [4669] Ps. li. 5.

   [4670] Job ix. 20, 30. Sept.

   [4671] 1 John ii. 1, 2.

   [4672] S. John xiii. 10.

   [4673] S. Matt. xvi. 18.

   [4674] S. Luke xxi. 31.

   [4675] S. Matt. vi. 12.

   [4676] 1 Cor. ix. 27.

   [4677] 2 Cor. xii. 7.

   [4678] 2 Cor. xi. 3.

   [4679] 2 Cor. ii. 10, 11.

   [4680] 1 Cor. x. 13.

   [4681] 1 Cor. x. 12.

   [4682] Gal. v. 7.

   [4683] 1 Thess. ii. 18.

   [4684] 1 Cor. vii. 5.

   [4685] Gal. v. 16, 17.

   [4686] Eph. vi. 12.

   [4687] Heb. vi. 4 sq.

   [4688] Various dates, ranging between a.d. 126 and a.d. 173, are
   assigned to the origin of Montanism. In addition to the tenet, that the
   church has no power to remit sin after baptism (though the power was
   claimed for the Montanistic prophets) and that some sins exclude for
   ever from the communion of the saints on earth, although the mercy of
   God may be extended to them hereafter, Montanus held second marriages
   to be no better than adultery, proscribed military service and secular
   life in general, denounced profane learning and amusements of every
   kind, advocated extreme simplicity of female dress, practised frequent
   and severe fasting, and inculcated the most rigorous asceticism. The
   sect produced a great effect on the church and lasted until the sixth
   century. As is well known, Tertullian in middle life lapsed into
   Montanism, and he was the most distinguished of its champions.
   Montanism has been described as an anticipation of the mediaeval system
   of Rome.

   [4689] The founder of the schism which afterwards bore the name of
   Novatian was Novatus, a presbyter of Carthage who went to Rome (about
   a.d. 250) and there co-operated with Novatianus, one of the most
   distinguished of the clergy of that city. The Novatianists, whose
   doctrines were near akin in many respects to those of Montanists,
   assumed the name of Cathari, or Puritans.

   [4690] Heb. vi. 9.

   [4691] James i. 12 sq.

   [4692] Ecclus. xxvii. 5.

   [4693] Ecclus. ii. 1.

   [4694] James i. 22 sq.

   [4695] James ii. 10.

   [4696] Rom. xi. 32.

   [4697] 2 Pet. ii. 9.

   [4698] 2 Pet. ii. 17, 18.

   [4699] Prov. xvi. 5. Sept.

   [4700] Apoc. ii. 2 sq.

   [4701] Matt. xi. 13.

   [4702] 1 Cor. x. 11.

   [4703] Ps. xxvi. 1, 2.

   [4704] Ps. li. 1.

   [4705] 2 Chron. xxxiii. 12, 13.

   [4706] 2 Kings xxiii. 29 sq. 2 Chron. xxxv. 20 sq.

   [4707] Zech. iii. 1 sq.

   [4708] Numb. xx. 13; Ps. cvi. 32.

   [4709] Job v. 17.

   [4710] Job vii. 1.

   [4711] Jerome blends two passages, Is. xiv. 12 (in which the Sept.
   reading is "that sendest to;" R.V. "didst lay low") and Ezek. xxviii.
   13 sq. In the passage from Isaiah the king of Babylon is compared to
   Lucifer, i.e. the shining one, the morning star, whose movements the
   Babylonians had been the first to record. See Sayce, Fresh Light from
   the Ancient Monuments, p. 178, and Cheyne's Isaiah. The subject of
   Ezekiel's prophecy is the Prince of Tyre.

   [4712] S. Luke x. 18.

   [4713] Job xl. 16, 21. R.V. "He lieth under the lotus trees, in the
   covert of the reed and the fen."

   [4714] Job xli. 34. Sept. R.V. "King over the sons of pride."

   [4715] Job xli. 13 sq. R.V. for the latter part of the verse has "Round
   about his teeth is terror, his strong scales are his pride." Jerome's
   words are not found in the existing Septuagint.

   [4716] The Septuagint omits much in this portion of the Book of Job.

   [4717] xli. 27.

   [4718] That is, deriving jumenta from juvo. The derivation, however, is
   from jungo.

   [4719] Ps. viii. 5 sq.

   [4720] The Italian beccafico.

   [4721] Rom. xiv. 20; 1 Tim. iv. 5.

   [4722] 1 Tim. iv. 3.

   [4723] Castum. Another reading is Cossum i.e. wood-worms, which were
   considered a delicacy in Pontus and Phrygia. The reading Castum is
   supported by Tert., De Iejun. cap. 16: In nostris xerophagiis
   blasphemias ingerens. Casto Isidis et Cybeles eos adæquas. Compare
   Arnob. Bk. V., and Jerome's Letter cvii. ad Lætam c. 10, and below c.
   7.

   [4724] See note on p. 383.

   [4725] That is, of Side in Pamphylia. He lived in the reigns of Hadrian
   and Antoninus Pius, a.d. 117-161. Only two fragments remain of his
   Greek poem in forty-two books.

   [4726] He appears to be Flavius the Grammarian to whom reference is
   made in the Book on Illustrious Men, chap. 80:--Firmianus, qui et
   Lactantius, Arnobii discipulus, sub Diocletiano principe accitus cum
   Flavio grammatico, cujus de Medicinalibus versu compositi exstant
   libri, etc.

   [4727] Born a.d. 23. His Historia Naturalis embraces astronomy,
   meteorology, geography, mineralogy, zoölogy, and botany, and comprises
   according to the author's own account 20,000 matters of importance
   drawn from 2,000 volumes.

   [4728] A native of Cilicia, who probably lived in the second century of
   the Christian era. He was a Greek physician and wrote a treatise on
   Materia Medica, in 5 books, which is still extant.

   [4729] 2 Cor. xii. 14.

   [4730] 2 Cor. iv. 16.

   [4731] Phil. i. 23.

   [4732] Rom. xiii. 14.

   [4733] Matt. x. 9, xix. 21; Mark vi. 8.

   [4734] Matt. xix. 21.

   [4735] 1 Cor. xv. 85.

   [4736] 1 Cor. vi. 13.

   [4737] That is, the wood-worm just referred to.

   [4738] Pannonia, of which Valens also was a native.

   [4739] This name, which signifies dwellers in caves, was applied by
   Greek geographers to various peoples, but especially to the uncivilized
   inhabitants of the west coast of the Red Sea, along the shores of Upper
   Egypt and Æthiopia. The whole coast was called Troglodytice.

   [4740] In 376 the Goths were driven out of their country by the Huns.
   They were allowed by Valens to cross the Danube, but war soon broke out
   and the emperor was defeated with great slaughter on Aug. 9, 378.

   [4741] The Sarmatians dwelt on the N. E. of the Sea of Azov, E. of the
   river Don.

   [4742] They were located in the S. E. of Germany.

   [4743] The name given to the great confederacy of German peoples who in
   a.d. 409 traversed Germany and Gaul, and invaded Spain. In 429 they
   conquered all the Roman dominions in Africa, and in 455 they plundered
   Rome. Their kingdom was destroyed by Belisarius in 535.

   [4744] A people of Central Asia. Cyrus the Great was slain in an
   expedition against them.

   [4745] On the Oxus near its entrance into the Caspian Sea.

   [4746] An agricultural people on the W. coast of Pontus.

   [4747] Hyrcania was a province of the Persian Empire, on the S. and S.
   E. shores of the Caspian or Hyrcanian Sea. Jerome draws many of these
   details from the treatise of Porphyry Peri apoches empsuchion.

   [4748] Antinous was drowned in the Nile. a.d. 122. The emperor's grief
   was so great that he enrolled his favourite amongst the gods, caused a
   temple to be erected to his honour at Mantinea, and founded the city of
   Antinoopolis.

   [4749] Ter. Eunuch. iv. 5, 6.

   [4750] Jer. ix. 21.

   [4751] An Egyptian perfuming powder.

   [4752] Probably an ointment made from the grape of the wild vine.

   [4753] The celebrated Cynic philosopher. He died at Corinth, at the age
   of nearly 90, b.c. 323.

   [4754] Academia was a piece of land on the Cephisus about
   three-quarters of a mile from Athens, originally belonging to the hero
   Academus. Here was a Gymnasium with plane and olive plantations, etc.
   Plato had a piece of land in the neighbourhood; here he taught, and
   after him his followers, who were hence called Academici. Cicero called
   his villa Academia.

   [4755] Flourished about b.c. 320. Though heir to a large fortune he
   renounced it all, and lived and died as a true Cynic. He was called the
   "door-opener," because it was his practice to visit every house at
   Athens and rebuke its inmates.

   [4756] A common form of Gnostic error revived many centuries afterwards
   by the Anabaptists.

   [4757] 1 Tim. v. 6.

   [4758] See Cicero, Repub. Bk. III.

   [4759] Sallust. In Cat. ch. 1.

   [4760] Prov. xx. 1.

   [4761] The most celebrated physician of antiquity. Born about b.c. 460,
   died about 357.

   [4762] Born at Pergamum a.d. 130, died probably in the year 200. His
   writings are considered to have had a more extensive influence on
   medical science than even those of Hippocrates.

   [4763] Fabricius was censor in b.c. 275, and devoted himself to
   repressing the prevalent taste for luxury. The story of his expelling
   from the Senate P. Cornelius Rufinus because he possessed ten pounds'
   weight of silver-plate is well-known.

   [4764] Curius Dentatus, Consul b.c. 290 with P. Cornelius Rufinus to
   whom allusion has just been made, was no less distinguished for
   simplicity of life than was Fabricius. He was censor b.c. 272.

   [4765] Ep. Lib. I. ep. 2.

   [4766] Or, "an ante-room to the closet"--Meditatorium. Comp.
   Tertullian, Treatise on Fasting, ch. 6.

   [4767] The Peripatetic philosopher, geographer, and historian, a
   disciple of Aristotle and the friend of Theophrastus.

   [4768] Chæremon was chief librarian of the Alexandrian library. He
   afterwards became one of Nero's tutors.

   [4769] Wars, Book II., ch. viii. 2 sq.; Antiquities, Bk. xviii. I. 2
   sq. Josephus nowhere says that the Essenes abstained from flesh and
   wine, or fasted daily. Philo commends them for so doing. Jerome here,
   as above, borrows from Porphyry. The "Wars of the Jews or History of
   the Destruction of Jerusalem," are here called the "History of the
   Jewish Captivity."

   [4770] Philo the Jew. His exact date cannot be given; but he was
   advanced in years when he went to Rome (a.d. 40) on his famous embassy
   in behalf of his countrymen.

   [4771] Neanthes lived about b.c. 241. He was a voluminous writer,
   chiefly on historical subjects.

   [4772] There were many physicians of this name.

   [4773] The sun-god of the Persians.

   [4774] Supposed to be the same as the Bardesanes born at Edessa in
   Mesopotamia, who flourished in the latter half of the second century.
   Jerome again refers to him in the book on Illustrious Men, c. 33.

   [4775] Xenocrates was born b.c. 396, died b.c. 314.

   [4776] Triptolemus was the legendary inventor of the plough and of
   agriculture.

   [4777] Poems ascribed to the mythical Orpheus are quoted by Plato. The
   extant poems which bear his name are forgeries of Christian grammarians
   and philosophers of the Alexandrine school; but some fragments of the
   old Orphic poetry are said to be remaining.

   [4778] Antisthenes was the founder of the Cynic philosophy. He was a
   devoted disciple of Socrates and flourished about b.c. 366.

   [4779] The distinguished Peripatetic philosopher and historian. He
   lived, probably, about the time of Ptolemy Philopator (b.c. 222-205).

   [4780] Gen. vi. 3, 5.

   [4781] Gen. viii. 21; ix. 3.

   [4782] Ex. xvi. 3.

   [4783] Numb. xi. 4-6.

   [4784] Deut. xxxii. 15. "Beloved" (dilectus). Correctly Jeshurun, that
   is, the Upright, a name of Israel.

   [4785] Deut. viii. 12-14.

   [4786] The curious custom of representing Moses with horns arose from a
   mistake in the Vulgate rendering. The Hebrew verb qvl, to emit rays, is
   derived from a word which, meaning mostly a horn, has in the dual the
   signification rays of light. See Hab. iii. 4.

   [4787] Luke ix. 31.

   [4788] Ex. xvii. 8.

   [4789] Josh. x. 13.

   [4790] 1 Sam. xiv. 24. Heb. "entered into the wood." The English
   version follows the Hebrew. The Sept. erhista (Jerome's prandebat) is
   perhaps only a repetition of the preceding thought. Another rendering
   inserts the negative, ouk erista.

   [4791] 1 Sam. xiv. 24.

   [4792] 1 Kings xix. 8-11.

   [4793] 1 Sam. vii. 7.

   [4794] 2 Kings xviii.

   [4795] Gen. xviii. 23 sq.

   [4796] 1 Kings xxi. 27-29.

   [4797] 1 Sam. i. 15, 17.

   [4798] Dan. i and ii.

   [4799] Dan. ix. 23. Heb. A man of desires. A.V. greatly beloved.

   [4800] The story is in the apocryphal part of the book of Daniel.

   [4801] Ps. cii. 9.

   [4802] Ps. cix. 24.

   [4803] 2 Sam. xii. 13.

   [4804] Lev. x. 9.

   [4805] Amos ii. 12.

   [4806] Jer. xxxv. 18.

   [4807] S. Luke ii. 36.

   [4808] S. Jerome is in accord with the Vulgate, Peshito, and certain
   manuscripts, but the R.V. omits S. Matt. xvii. 21 (Howbeit this kind
   goeth not out but by prayer and fasting) and in S. Mark ix. 29 omits
   the words respecting fasting. S. Luke does not refer to our Lord's
   supposed remark.

   [4809] Acts x. 4.

   [4810] 2 Cor. xi. 27.

   [4811] 1 Tim. v. 23.

   [4812] 1 Tim. iv. 3.

   [4813] Prov. xvi. 26. Sept.

   [4814] S. Matt. xi. 12.

   [4815] Rom. xiv. 3.

   [4816] Rom. xiv. 14 sq.

   [4817] Rom. xiv. 2.

   [4818] Rom. xiv. 5 sq.

   [4819] S. Matt. v. 6.

   [4820] S. John iv. 32.

   [4821] S. Matt. v. 34. (Rather, not to be anxious about it.)

   [4822] S. Luke xxiv. 42; S. John xxi. 13.

   [4823] S. Luke xv. 19-31.

   [4824] S. Matt. xvi. 17, 18.

   [4825] See above.

   [4826] S. Mark v. 43: S. Luke viii. 55. Our Lord is not related to have
   given the command in the case of the son of the widow of Nain, or in
   that of Lazarus.

   [4827] S. John xii. 2.

   [4828] Acts x. 10. In our version "the housetop."

   [4829] S. John iv. 6.

   [4830] Isa. lviii. 5 sq.

   [4831] xvi. 29.

   [4832] Numb. xi. 34. Tertullian also speaks of the graves remaining.

   [4833] 1 Kings xiii. 24.

   [4834] Joel i. 14; ii. 15. Jerome agrees with the Sept. Therapeia. The
   Heb. root signifies to close or bind; hence the meaning healing. But
   others translate Therapeia by worship, or service. The correct
   rendering appears to be a solemn assembly as in A.V.

   [4835] S. Matt. xxv. 34.

   [4836] S. Matt. xxv. 41.

   [4837] S. John viii. 44.

   [4838] S. Matt. xix. 29; S. Mark x. 29, 30; S. Luke xviii. 29, 30.

   [4839] S. John vi. 56.

   [4840] S. John xiv. 23.

   [4841] S. John xiv. 2.

   [4842] 1 Cor. iii. 16; vi. 19.

   [4843] S. John xvii. 20-23.

   [4844] In Cyprus, where Zeno the founder of the Stoic school was born.

   [4845] i.e., Jovinianus. Jerome for the moment addresses the reader.

   [4846] Persius I. 128, Conington's translation.

   [4847] Ezek. xxxiv. 17, 20, 21.

   [4848] Ezek. xxxiv. 31.

   [4849] Rom. xii. 3 sq.

   [4850] Rom. xiv. 5.

   [4851] 1 Cor. iii. 6 sq.

   [4852] 1 Cor. iii. 10 sq.

   [4853] 1 Cor. iv. 1, 2.

   [4854] 1 Cor. ix. 13 sq.

   [4855] 1 Cor. xii. 4.

   [4856] 1 Cor. xii. 12.

   [4857] 1 Cor. xii. 28 sq.

   [4858] 1 Cor. xiii. 8, 9, 10.

   [4859] 1 Cor. xiii. 18; xiv. 1.

   [4860] 1 Cor. xiv. 5.

   [4861] 1 Cor. xiv. 18.

   [4862] 1 Cor. xv. 9, 10.

   [4863] 1 Cor. xv. 22.

   [4864] 1 Cor. xv. 39.

   [4865] Job ix. 9; xxxviii. 32.

   [4866] 2 Cor. v. 10.

   [4867] 2 Cor. ix. 6.

   [4868] Eph. iii. 10.

   [4869] Eph. iv. 7.

   [4870] Ps. lxxiii. 17.

   [4871] See Acts xxvii. 23 and the context.

   [4872] Gen. xix. 18-21.

   [4873] 1 Sam. xxx. 1 sq.

   [4874] S. Luke xiii. 4.

   [4875] 1 Cor. xi. 27.

   [4876] Mal. iv. 2.

   [4877] S. Matt. xxv. 13.

   [4878] S. John xix. 6.

   [4879] Wisd. vi. 7.

   [4880] Ex. xxi. 2.

   [4881] Lev. xxv. 13.

   [4882] S. Matt. xix. 29; S. Mark x. 30; S. Luke xviii. 30. In S.
   Matthew some authorities agree with S. Luke in reading "manifold."

   [4883] Matt. xi. 11.

   [4884] S. Luke xvii. 5.

   [4885] Matt. xiv. 31.

   [4886] Jer. xxxi. 31.

   [4887] Jer. xxxi. 33, 34.

   [4888] S. Matt. v. 19.

   [4889] S. Luke xiv. 9.

   [4890] S. John xiv. 2, 3.

   [4891] S. Matt. xx. 23.

   [4892] S. John xiv. 3.

   [4893] Ps. lxxiii. 26.

   [4894] Ez. xliv. 10.

   [4895] 1 Cor. vi. 19.

   [4896] Correctly, a portion of two, i.e., the portion of a first-born.
   Deut. xxi. 17.

   [4897] S. Luke vii., S. Matt. xxvi., S. Mark xiv., S. John xii.

   [4898] S. John xvii. 20, 21.

   [4899] 2 Pet. i. 4.

   [4900] S. John xvii. 23.

   [4901] S. John i. 12, 13.

   [4902] S. John vi. 57 sq.

   [4903] 1 John iv. 13, 15.

   [4904] Gal. iv. 19.

   [4905] 1 Cor. xii. 22-24.

   [4906] S. Luke xi. 34.

   [4907] 1 John v. 16.

   [4908] Jer. vii. 16.

   [4909] Rom. v. 14.

   [4910] Wisd. i. 11.

   [4911] Ps. cxvi. 11; Rom. iii. 4.

   [4912] Ps. li. 4.

   [4913] Ezek. xvi. 62, 63.

   [4914] Ezek. xxxvi. 31, 32.

   [4915] Letter XXI.

   [4916] S. Matt. xx. 26.

   [4917] S. Luke vii. 47.

   [4918] S. Matt. xxv. 15 sq.

   [4919] Phil. iii. 13.

   [4920] Josh. ix. 27.

   [4921] 2 Sam. xxi. 1.

   [4922] S. Luke xii. 47, 48.

   [4923] Ps. cxix. in our arrangement of the Psalter. The psalm is
   divided into twenty-two portions, which begin with the successive
   letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The following fifteen psalms are called
   in our Authorized Version, Songs of Degrees (Vulgate, graduum, steps).
   For the origin of the title, Wordsworth, or Neal and Littledale on Ps.
   cxx. may be consulted.

   [4924] Ps. cxxxiv. 1.

   [4925] Numb. xxxiv. 15; Josh. xiv. 3.

   [4926] Numb. xviii. 20.

   [4927] Lev. xvi. 2; Heb. ix. 7.

   [4928] Ex. xxviii. etc.

   [4929] Numb. vii. 5.

   [4930] Aristippus though the disciple of Socrates, taught that pleasure
   was the highest good.

   [4931] Ps. cxx. 5.

   [4932] Is. lxiii. 3.

   [4933] S. John xix. 6, 15.

   [4934] Jovinianus's doctrine is said to have influenced some who had
   taken a vow of virginity, to marry.

   [4935] Virgil Æn. iv. 172.

   [4936] Pythagoras asserted that he had once been the Trojan Euphorbus.

   [4937] Is. iii. 16.

   [4938] Jer. li. 6; vi. 14.

   [4939] Jer. vii. 4; Ps. xiv. 4; liii. 4.

   [4940] Jer. xxviii. 13.

   [4941] That is, cælebs from cælum.

   [4942] Jer. v. 8.

   [4943] That is, Jove.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Against Vigilantius.

   ------------------------

   Introduction.

   Full details respecting Vigilantius, against whom this treatise, the
   result of a single night's labour, is directed, may be found in a work
   on "Vigilantius and His Times," published in 1844 by Dr. Gilly, canon
   of Durham. It will perhaps, however, assist the reader if we briefly
   remark that he was born about 370, at Calagurris, near Convenæ
   (Comminges), which was a station on the Roman road from Aquitaine to
   Spain. His father was probably the keeper of the inn, and Vigilantius
   appears to have been brought up to his father's business. He was of a
   studious character, and Sulpicius Severus, the ecclesiastical
   historian, who had estates in those parts, took him into his service,
   and, possibly, made him manager of his estates. Having been ordained he
   was introduced to Jerome (then living at Bethlehem, in 395) through
   Paulinus of Nola, who was the friend of Sulpicius Severus. After
   staying with Jerome for a considerable time he begged to be dismissed,
   and left in great haste without giving any reason. Returning to Gaul,
   he settled in his native country. Jerome hearing that he was spreading
   reports of him as favouring the views of Origen, and in other ways
   defaming him and his friends, wrote him a sharp letter of rebuke
   (Letter LXI.). The work of Vigilantius which drew from Jerome the
   following treatise was written in the year a.d. 406; not "hastily,
   under provocation such as he may have felt in leaving Bethlehem." but
   after the lapse of six or seven years. The points against which he
   argued as being superstitious are: (1) the reverence paid to the relics
   of holy men by carrying them round the church in costly vessels or
   silken wrappings to be kissed, and the prayers offered to the dead; (2)
   the late watchings at the basilicas of the martyrs, with their
   attendant scandals, the burning of numerous tapers. alleged miracles,
   etc.; (3) the sending of alms to Jerusalem, which, Vigilantius urged,
   had better be spent among the poor in each separate diocese, and the
   monkish vow of poverty; (4) the exaggerated estimate of virginity.

   The bishop of the diocese, Exsuperius of Toulouse, was strongly in
   favour of the views of Vigilantius, and they began to spread widely.
   Complaints having reached Jerome through the presbyter Riparius, he at
   once expressed his indignation, and offered to answer in detail if the
   work of Vigilantius were sent to him. In 406 he received it through
   Sisinnius, who was bearing alms to the East. It has been truly said
   that this treatise has less of reason and more of abuse than any other
   which Jerome wrote. But in spite of this the author was followed by the
   chief ecclesiastics of the day, and the practices impugned by
   Vigilantius prevailed almost unchecked till the sixteenth century.

   1. The world has given birth to many monsters; in [4944] Isaiah we read
   of centaurs and sirens, screech-owls and pelicans. Job, in mystic
   language, describes Leviathan and Behemoth; Cerberus and the birds of
   Stymphalus, the Erymanthian boar and the Nemean lion, the Chimæra and
   the many-headed Hydra, are told of in poetic fables. Virgil describes
   Cacus. Spain has produced Geryon, with his three bodies. Gaul alone has
   had no monsters, but has ever been rich in men of courage and great
   eloquence. All at once Vigilantius, or, more correctly, Dormitantius,
   has arisen, animated by an unclean spirit, to fight against the Spirit
   of Christ, and to deny that religious reverence is to be paid to the
   tombs of the martyrs. Vigils, he says, are to be condemned; Alleluia
   must never be sung except at Easter; continence is a heresy; chastity a
   hot-bed of lust. And as Euphorbus is said to have been born again in
   the person of Pythagoras, so in this fellow the corrupt mind of
   Jovinianus has arisen; so that in him, no less than in his predecessor,
   we are bound to meet the snares of the devil. The words may be justly
   applied to him: [4945] "Seed of evil-doers, prepare thy children for
   the slaughter because of the sins of thy father." Jovinianus, condemned
   by the authority of the Church of Rome, amidst pheasants and swine's
   flesh, breathed out, or rather belched out his spirit. And now this
   tavern-keeper of Calagurris, who, according to the name of his [4946]
   native village is a Quintilian, only dumb instead of eloquent, is
   [4947] mixing water with the wine. According to the trick which he
   knows of old, he is trying to blend his perfidious poison with the
   Catholic faith; he assails virginity and hates chastity; he revels with
   worldlings and declaims against the fasts of the saints; he plays the
   philosopher over his cups, and soothes himself with the sweet strains
   of psalmody, while he smacks his lips over his cheese-cakes; nor could
   he deign to listen to the songs of David and Jeduthun, and Asaph and
   the sons of Core, except at the banqueting table. This I have poured
   forth with more grief than amusement, for I cannot restrain myself and
   turn a deaf ear to the wrongs inflicted on apostles and martyrs.

   2. Shameful to relate, there are bishops who are said to be associated
   with him in his wickedness--if at least they are to be called
   bishops--who ordain no deacons but such as have been previously
   married; who credit no celibate with chastity--nay, rather, who show
   clearly what measure of holiness of life they can claim by indulging in
   evil suspicions of all men, and, unless the candidates for ordination
   appear before them with pregnant wives, and infants wailing in the arms
   of their mothers, will not administer to them Christ's ordinance. What
   are the Churches of the East to do? What is to become of the Egyptian
   Churches and those belonging to the Apostolic Seat, which accept for
   the ministry only men who are virgins, or those who practice
   continency, or, if married, abandon their conjugal rights? Such is the
   teaching of Dormitantius, who throws the reins upon the neck of lust,
   and by his encouragement doubles the natural heat of the flesh, which
   in youth is mostly at boiling point, or rather slakes it by intercourse
   with women; so that there is nothing to separate us from swine, nothing
   wherein we differ from the brute creation, or from horses, respecting
   which it is written: [4948] "They were toward women like raging horses;
   everyone neighed after his neighbour's wife." This is that which the
   Holy Spirit says by the mouth of David: [4949] "Be ye not like horse
   and mule which have no understanding." And again respecting
   Dormitantius and his friends: [4950] "Bind the jaws of them who draw
   not near unto thee with bit and bridle."

   3. But it is now time for us to adduce his own words and answer him in
   detail. For, possibly, in his malice, he may choose once more to
   misrepresent me, and say that I have trumped up a case for the sake of
   showing off my rhetorical and declamatory powers in combating it, like
   the letter [4951] which I wrote to Gaul, relating to a mother and
   daughter who were at variance. This little treatise, which I now
   dictate, is due to the reverend presbyters Riparius and Desiderius, who
   write that their parishes have been defiled by being in his
   neighbourhood, and have sent me, by our brother Sisinnius, the books
   which he vomited forth in a drunken fit. They also declare that some
   persons are found who, from their inclination to his vices, assent to
   his blasphemies. He is a barbarian both in speech and knowledge. His
   style is rude. He cannot defend even the truth; but, for the sake of
   laymen, and poor women, laden with sins, ever learning and never coming
   to a knowledge of the truth, I will spend upon his melancholy trifles a
   single night's labour, otherwise I shall seem to have treated with
   contempt the letters of the reverend persons who have entreated me to
   undertake the task.

   4. He certainly well represents his race. Sprung from a set of brigands
   and persons collected together from all quarters (I mean those whom Cn.
   Pompey, after the conquest of Spain, when he was hastening to return
   for his triumph, brought down from the Pyrenees and gathered together
   into one town, whence the name of the city Convenæ [4952] ), he has
   carried on their brigand practices by his attack upon the Church of
   God. Like his ancestors the Vectones, the Arrabaci, and the
   Celtiberians, he makes his raids upon the churches of Gaul, not
   carrying the standard of the cross, but, on the contrary, the ensign of
   the devil. Pompey did just the same in the East. After overcoming the
   Cilician and Isaurian pirates and brigands, he founded a city, bearing
   his own name, between Cilicia and Isauria. That city, however, to this
   day, observes the ordinances of its ancestors, and no Dormitantius has
   arisen in it; but Gaul supports a native foe, and sees seated in the
   Church a man who has lost his head and who ought to be put in the
   strait-jacket which Hippocrates recommended. Among other blasphemies,
   he may be heard to say, "What need is there for you not only to pay
   such honour, not to say adoration, to the thing, whatever it may be,
   which you carry about in a little vessel and worship?" And again, in
   the same book, "Why do you kiss and adore a bit of powder wrapped up in
   a cloth?" And again, in the same book, "Under the cloak of religion we
   see what is all but a heathen ceremony introduced into the churches:
   while the sun is still shining, heaps of tapers are lighted, and
   everywhere a paltry bit of powder, wrapped up in a costly cloth, is
   kissed and worshipped. Great honour do men of this sort pay to the
   blessed martyrs, who, they think, are to be made glorious by trumpery
   tapers, when the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne, with all the
   brightness of His majesty, gives them light?"

   5. Madman, who in the world ever adored the martyrs? who ever thought
   man was God? Did not [4953] Paul and Barnabas, when the people of
   Lycaonia thought them to be Jupiter and Mercury, and would have offered
   sacrifices to them, rend their clothes and declare they were men? Not
   that they were not better than Jupiter and Mercury, who were but men
   long ago dead, but because, under the mistaken ideas of the Gentiles,
   the honour due to God was being paid to them. And we read the same
   respecting Peter, who, when Cornelius wished to adore him, raised him
   by the hand, and said, [4954] "Stand up, for I also am a man." And have
   you the audacity to speak of "the mysterious something or other which
   you carry about in a little vessel and worship?" I want to know what it
   is that you call "something or other." Tell us more clearly (that there
   may be no restraint on your blasphemy) what you mean by the phrase "a
   bit of powder wrapped up in a costly cloth in a tiny vessel." It is
   nothing less than the relics of the martyrs which he is vexed to see
   covered with a costly veil, and not bound up with rags or hair-cloth,
   or thrown on the midden, so that Vigilantius alone in his drunken
   slumber may be worshipped. Are we, therefore guilty of sacrilege when
   we enter the basilicas of the Apostles? Was the Emperor Constantius I.
   guilty of sacrilege when he transferred the sacred relics of Andrew,
   Luke, and Timothy to Constantinople? In their presence the demons cry
   out, and the devils who dwell in Vigilantius confess that they feel the
   influence of the saints. And at the present day is the Emperor Arcadius
   guilty of sacrilege, who after so long a time has conveyed the bones of
   the blessed Samuel from Judea to Thrace? Are all the bishops to be
   considered not only sacrilegious, but silly into the bargain, because
   they carried that most worthless thing, dust and ashes, wrapped in silk
   in golden vessel? Are the people of all the Churches fools, because
   they went to meet the sacred relics, and welcomed them with as much joy
   as if they beheld a living prophet in the midst of them, so that there
   was one great swarm of people from Palestine to Chalcedon with one
   voice re-echoing the praises of Christ? They were forsooth, adoring
   Samuel and not Christ, whose Levite and prophet Samuel was. You show
   mistrust because you think only of the dead body, and therefore
   blaspheme. Read the Gospel-- [4955] "The God of Abraham, the God of
   Isaac, the God of Jacob: He is not the God of the dead, but of the
   living." If then they are alive, they are not, to use your expression,
   kept in honourable confinement.

   6. For you say that the souls of Apostles and martyrs have their abode
   either in the bosom of Abraham, or in the place of refreshment, or
   under the altar of God, and that they cannot leave their own tombs, and
   be present where they will. They are, it seems, of senatorial rank, and
   are not subjected to the worst kind of prison and the society of
   murderers, but are kept apart in liberal and honourable custody in the
   isles of the blessed and the Elysian fields. Will you lay down the law
   for God? Will you put the Apostles into chains? So that to the day of
   judgment they are to be kept in confinement, and are not with their
   Lord, although it is written concerning them, [4956] "They follow the
   Lamb, whithersoever he goeth." If the Lamb is present everywhere, the
   same must be believed respecting those who are with the Lamb. And while
   the devil and the demons wander through the whole world, and with only
   too great speed present themselves everywhere; are martyrs, after the
   shedding of their blood, to be kept out of sight shut up in a [4957]
   coffin, from whence they cannot escape? You say, in your pamphlet, that
   so long as we are alive we can pray for one another; but once we die,
   the prayer of no person for another can be heard, and all the more
   because the martyrs, though they [4958] cry for the avenging of their
   blood, have never been able to obtain their request. If Apostles and
   martyrs while still in the body can pray for others, when they ought
   still to be anxious for themselves, how much more must they do so when
   once they have won their crowns, overcome, and triumphed? A single man,
   Moses, oft [4959] wins pardon from God for six hundred thousand armed
   men; and [4960] Stephen, the follower of his Lord and the first
   Christian martyr, entreats pardon for his persecutors; and when once
   they have entered on their life with Christ, shall they have less power
   than before? The Apostle Paul [4961] says that two hundred and
   seventy-six souls were given to him in the ship; and when, after his
   dissolution, he has begun to be with Christ, must he shut his mouth,
   and be unable to say a word for those who throughout the whole world
   have believed in his Gospel? Shall Vigilantius the live dog be better
   than Paul the dead lion? I should be right in saying so after [4962]
   Ecclesiastes, if I admitted that Paul is dead in spirit. The truth is
   that the saints are not called dead, but are said to be asleep.
   Wherefore [4963] Lazarus, who was about to rise again, is said to have
   slept. And the Apostle [4964] forbids the Thessalonians to be sorry for
   those who were asleep. As for you, when wide awake you are asleep, and
   asleep when you write, and you bring before me an apocryphal book
   which, under the name of Esdras, is read by you and those of your
   feather, and in this book it is [4965] written that after death no one
   dares pray for others. I have never read the book: for what need is
   there to take up what the Church does not receive? It can hardly be
   your intention to confront me with Balsamus, and Barbelus, and the
   Thesaurus of Manichæus, and the ludicrous name of Leusiboras; though
   possibly because you live at the foot of the Pyrenees, and border on
   Iberia, you follow the incredible marvels of the ancient heretic [4966]
   Basilides and his so-called knowledge, which is mere ignorance, and set
   forth what is condemned by the authority of the whole world. I say this
   because in your short treatise you quote Solomon as if he were on your
   side, though Solomon never wrote the words in question at all; so that,
   as you have a second Esdras you may have a second Solomon. And, if you
   like, you may read the imaginary revelations of all the patriarchs and
   prophets, and, when you have learned them, you may sing them among the
   women in their weaving-shops, or rather order them to be read in your
   taverns, the more easily by these melancholy ditties to stimulate the
   ignorant mob to replenish their cups.

   7. As to the question of tapers, however, we do not, as you in vain
   misrepresent us, light them in the daytime, but by their solace we
   would cheer the darkness of the night, and watch for the dawn, lest we
   should be blind like you and sleep in darkness. And if some persons,
   being ignorant and simple minded laymen, or, at all events, religious
   women--of whom we can truly say, [4967] "I allow that they have a zeal
   for God, but not according to knowledge"--adopt the practice in honour
   of the martyrs, what harm is thereby done to you? Once upon a time even
   the Apostles [4968] pleaded that the ointment was wasted, but they were
   rebuked by the voice of the Lord. Christ did not need the ointment, nor
   do martyrs need the light of tapers; and yet that woman poured out the
   ointment in honour of Christ, and her heart's devotion was accepted.
   All those who light these tapers have their reward according to their
   faith, as the Apostle says: [4969] "Let every one abound in his own
   meaning." Do you call men of this sort idolaters? I do not deny, that
   all of us who believe in Christ have passed from the error of idolatry.
   For we are not born Christians, but become Christians by being born
   again. And because we formerly worshipped idols, does it follow that we
   ought not now to worship God lest we seem to pay like honour to Him and
   to idols? In the one case respect was paid to idols, and therefore the
   ceremony is to be abhorred; in the other the martyrs are venerated, and
   the same ceremony is therefore to be allowed. Throughout the whole
   Eastern Church, even when there are no relics of the martyrs, whenever
   the Gospel is to be read the candles are lighted, although the dawn may
   be reddening the sky, not of course to scatter the darkness, but by way
   of evidencing our joy. [4970] And accordingly the virgins in the Gospel
   always have their lamps lighted. And the Apostles are [4971] told to
   have their loins girded, and their lamps burning in their hands. And of
   John Baptist we read, [4972] "He was the lamp that burneth and
   shineth"; so that, under the figure of corporeal light, that light is
   represented of which we read in the Psalter, [4973] "Thy word is a lamp
   unto my feet, O Lord, and a light unto my paths."

   8. Does the bishop of Rome do wrong when he offers sacrifices to the
   Lord over the venerable bones of the dead men Peter and Paul, as we
   should say, but according to you, over a worthless bit of dust, and
   judges their tombs worthy to be Christ's altars? And not only is the
   bishop of one city in error, but the bishops of the whole world, who,
   despite the tavern-keeper Vigilantius, enter the basilicas of the dead,
   in which "a worthless bit of dust and ashes lies wrapped up in a
   cloth," defiled and defiling all else. Thus, according to you, the
   sacred buildings are like the sepulchres of the Pharisees, whitened
   without, while within they have filthy remains, and are full of foul
   smells and uncleanliness. And then he dares to expectorate his filth
   upon the subject and to say: "Is it the case that the souls of the
   martyrs love their ashes, and hover round them, and are always present,
   lest haply if any one come to pray and they were absent, they could not
   hear?" Oh, monster, who ought to be banished to the ends of the earth!
   do you laugh at the relics of the martyrs, and in company with
   Eunomius, the father of this heresy, slander the Churches of Christ?
   Are you not afraid of being in such company, and of speaking against us
   the same things which he utters against the Church? For all his
   followers refuse to enter the basilicas of Apostles and martyrs, so
   that, forsooth, they may worship the dead Eunomius, whose books they
   consider are of more authority than the Gospels; and they believe that
   the light of truth was in him just as other heretics maintain that the
   Paraclete came into Montanus, and say that Manichæus himself was the
   Paraclete. You cannot find an occasion of boasting even in supposing
   that you are the inventor of a new kind of wickedness, for your heresy
   long ago broke out against the Church. It found, however, an opponent
   in Tertullian, a very learned man, who wrote a famous treatise which he
   called most correctly Scorpiacum, [4974] because, as the scorpion bends
   itself like a bow to inflict its wound, so what was formerly called the
   heresy of Cain pours poison into the body of the Church; it has slept
   or rather been buried for a long time, but has been now awakened by
   Dormitantius. I am surprised you do not tell us that there must upon no
   account be martyrdoms, inasmuch as God, who does not ask for the blood
   of goats and bulls, much less requires the blood of men. This is what
   you say, or rather, even if you do not say it, you are taken as meaning
   to assert it. For in maintaining that the relics of the martyrs are to
   be trodden under foot, you forbid the shedding of their blood as being
   worthy of no honour.

   9. Respecting vigils and the frequent keeping of night-watches in the
   basilicas of the martyrs, I have given a brief reply in another letter
   [4975] which, about two years ago, I wrote to the reverend presbyter
   Riparius. You argue that they ought to be abjured, lest we seem to be
   often keeping Easter, and appear not to observe the customary yearly
   vigils. If so, then sacrifices should not be offered to Christ on the
   Lord's day lest we frequently keep the Easter of our Lord's
   Resurrection, and introduce the custom of having many Easters instead
   of one. We must not, however, impute to pious men the faults and errors
   of youths and worthless women such as are often detected at night. It
   is true that, even at the Easter vigils, something of the kind usually
   comes to light; but the faults of a few form no argument against
   religion in general, and such persons, without keeping vigil, can go
   wrong either in their own houses or in those of other people. The
   treachery of Judas did not annul the loyalty of the Apostles. And if
   others keep vigil badly, our vigils are not thereby to be stopped; nay,
   rather let those who sleep to gratify their lust be compelled to watch
   that they may preserve their chastity. For if a thing once done be
   good, it cannot be bad if often done; and if there is some fault to be
   avoided, the blame lies not in its being done often, but in its being
   done at all. And so we should not watch at Easter-tide for fear that
   adulterers may satisfy their long pent-up desires, or that the wife may
   find an opportunity for sinning without having the key turned against
   her by her husband. The occasions which seldom recur are those which
   are most eagerly longed for.

   10. I cannot traverse all the topics embraced in the letters of the
   reverend presbyters; I will adduce a few points from the tracts of
   Vigilantius. He argues against the signs and miracles which are wrought
   in the basilicas of the martyrs, and says that they are of service to
   the unbelieving, not to believers, as though the question now were for
   whose advantage they occur, not by what power. Granted that signs
   belong to the faithless, who, because they would not obey the word and
   doctrine, are brought to believe by means of signs. Even our Lord
   wrought signs for the unbelieving, and yet our Lord's signs are not on
   that account to be impugned, because those people were faithless, but
   must be worthy of greater admiration because they were so powerful that
   they subdued even the hardest hearts, and compelled men to believe. And
   so I will not have you tell me that signs are for the unbelieving; but
   answer my question--how is it that poor worthless dust and ashes are
   associated with this wondrous power of signs and miracles? I see, I
   see, most unfortunate of mortals, why you are so sad and what causes
   your fear. That unclean spirit who forces you to write these things has
   often been tortured by this worthless dust, aye, and is being tortured
   at this moment, and though in your case he conceals his wounds, in
   others he makes confession. You will hardly follow the heathen and
   impious Porphyry and Eunomius, and pretend that these are the tricks of
   the demons, and that they do not really cry out, but feign their
   torments. Let me give you my advice: go to the basilicas of the
   martyrs, and some day you will be cleansed; you will find there many in
   like case with yourself, and will be set on fire, not by the martyrs'
   tapers which offend you, but by invisible flames; and you will then
   confess what you now deny, and will freely proclaim your name--that you
   who speak in the person of Vigilantius are really either Mercury, for
   greedy of gain was he; or Nocturnus, who, according to Plautus's
   "Amphitryon," slept while Jupiter, two nights together, had his
   adulterous connection with Alcmena, and thus begat the mighty Hercules;
   or at all events Father Bacchus, of drunken fame, with the tankard
   hanging from his shoulder, with his ever ruby face, foaming lips, and
   unbridled brawling.

   11. Once, when a sudden earthquake in this province in the middle of
   the night awoke us all out of our sleep, you, the most prudent and the
   wisest of men, began to pray without putting your clothes on, and
   recalled to our minds the story of Adam and Eve in Paradise; they,
   indeed, when their eyes were opened were ashamed, for they saw that
   they were naked, and covered their shame with the leaves of trees; but
   you, who were stripped alike of your shirt and of your faith, in the
   sudden terror which overwhelmed you, and with the fumes of your last
   night's booze still hanging about you, showed your wisdom by exposing
   your nakedness in only too evident a manner to the eyes of the
   brethren. Such are the adversaries of the Church; these are the leaders
   who fight against the blood of the martyrs; here is a specimen of the
   orators who thunder against the Apostles, or, rather, such are the mad
   dogs which bark at the disciples of Christ.

   12. I confess my own fear, for possibly it may be thought to spring
   from superstition. When I have been angry, or have had evil thoughts in
   my mind, or some phantom of the night has beguiled me, I do not dare to
   enter the basilicas of the martyrs, I shudder all over in body and
   soul. You may smile, perhaps, and deride this as on a level with the
   wild fancies of weak women. If it be so, I am not ashamed of having a
   faith like that of those who were the first to see the risen Lord; who
   were sent to the Apostles; who, in the person of the mother of our Lord
   and Saviour, were commended to the holy Apostles. Belch out your shame,
   if you will, with men of the world, I will fast with women; yea, with
   religious men whose looks witness to their chastity, and who, with the
   cheek pale from prolonged abstinence, show forth the chastity of
   Christ.

   13. Something, also, appears to be troubling you. You are afraid that,
   if continence, sobriety, and fasting strike root among the people of
   Gaul, your taverns will not pay, and you will be unable to keep up
   through the night your diabolical vigils and drunken revels. Moreover,
   I have learnt from those same letters that, in defiance of the
   authority of Paul, nay, rather of Peter, John, and James, who gave the
   right hand of fellowship to Paul and Barnabas, and commanded them to
   remember the poor, you forbid any pecuniary relief to be sent to
   Jerusalem for the benefit of the saints. Now, if I reply to this, you
   will immediately give tongue and cry out that I am pleading my own
   cause. You, forsooth, were so generous to the whole community that if
   you had not come to Jerusalem, and lavished your own money or that of
   your patrons, we should all be on the verge of starvation. I say what
   the blessed Apostle Paul says in nearly all his Epistles; and he makes
   it a rule for the Churches of the Gentiles that, on the first day of
   the week, that is, on the Lord's day, contributions should be made by
   every one which should be sent up to Jerusalem for the relief of the
   saints, and that either by his own disciples, or by those whom they
   should themselves approve; and if it were thought fit, he would himself
   either send, or take what was collected. Also in the Acts of the
   Apostles, when speaking to the governor Felix, he says, [4976] "After
   many years I went up to Jerusalem to bring alms to my nation and
   offerings, and to perform my vows, amidst which they found me purified
   in the temple." Might he not have distributed in some other part of the
   world, and in the infant Churches which he was training in his own
   faith, the gifts he had received from others? But he longed to give to
   the poor of the holy places who, abandoning their own little
   possessions for the sake of Christ, turned with their whole heart to
   the service of the Lord. It would take too long now if I purposed to
   repeat all the passages from the whole range of his Epistles in which
   he advocates and urges with all his heart that money be sent to
   Jerusalem and to the holy places for the faithful; not to gratify
   avarice, but to give relief; not to accumulate wealth, but to support
   the weakness of the poor body, and to stave off cold and hunger. And
   this custom continues in Judea to the present day, not only among us,
   but also among the Hebrews, so that they who [4977] meditate in the law
   of the Lord, day and night, and have [4978] no father upon earth except
   the Lord alone, may be cherished by the aid of the synagogues and of
   the whole world; that there may be [4979] equality--not that some may
   be refreshed while others are in distress, but that the abundance of
   some may support the need of others.

   14. You will reply that every one can do this in his own country, and
   that there will never be wanting poor who ought to be supported with
   the resources of the Church. And we do not deny that doles should be
   distributed to all poor people, even to Jews and Samaritans, if the
   means will allow. But the Apostle teaches that alms should be given to
   all, indeed, [4980] especially, however, to those who are of the
   household of faith. And respecting these the Saviour said in the
   Gospel, [4981] "Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of
   unrighteousness, who may receive you into everlasting habitations."
   What! Can those poor creatures, with their rags and filth, lorded over,
   as they are, by raging lust, can they who own nothing, now or
   hereafter, have eternal habitations? No doubt it is not the poor
   simply, but the poor in spirit, who are called blessed; those of whom
   it is written, [4982] "Blessed is he who gives his mind to the poor and
   needy; the Lord shall deliver him in the evil day." But the fact is, in
   supporting the poor of the common people, what is needed is not mind,
   but money. In the case of the saintly poor the mind has blessed
   exercises, since you give to one who receives with a blush, and when he
   has received is grieved, that while sowing spiritual things he must
   reap your carnal things. As for his argument that they who keep what
   they have, and distribute among the poor, little by little, the
   increase of their property, act more wisely than they who sell their
   possessions, and once for all give all away, not I but the Lord shall
   make answer: [4983] "If thou wilt be perfect, go sell all that thou
   hast and give to the poor, and come, follow Me." He speaks to him who
   wishes to be perfect, who, with the Apostles, leaves father, ship, and
   net. The man whom you approve stands in the second or third rank; yet
   we welcome him provided it be understood that the first is to be
   preferred to the second, and the second to the third.

   15. Let me add that our monks are not to be deterred from their
   resolution by you with your viper's tongue and savage bite. Your
   argument respecting them runs thus: If all men were to seclude
   themselves and live in solitude, who is there to frequent the churches?
   Who will remain to win those engaged in secular pursuits? Who will be
   able to urge sinners to virtuous conduct? Similarly, if all were as
   silly as you, who could be wise? And, to follow out your argument,
   virginity would not deserve our approbation. For if all were virgins,
   we should have no marriages; the race would perish; infants would not
   cry in their cradles; midwives would lose their pay and turn beggars;
   and Dormitantius, all alone and shrivelled up with cold, would lie
   awake in his bed. The truth is, virtue is a rare thing and not eagerly
   sought after by the many. Would that all were as the few of whom it is
   said: [4984] "Many are called, few are chosen." The prison would be
   empty. But, indeed, a monk's function is not to teach, but to lament;
   to mourn either for himself or for the world, and with terror to
   anticipate our Lord's advent. Knowing his own weakness and the frailty
   of the vessel which he carries, he is afraid of stumbling, lest he
   strike against something, and it fall and be broken. Hence he shuns the
   sight of women, and particularly of young women, and so far chastens
   himself as to dread even what is safe.

   16. Why, you will say, go to the desert? The reason is plain: That I
   may not hear or see you; that I may not be disturbed by your madness;
   that I may not be engaged in conflict with you; that the eye of the
   harlot nay not lead me captive: that beauty may not lead me to unlawful
   embraces. You will reply: "This is not to fight, but to run away. Stand
   in line of battle, put on your armour and resist your foes, so that,
   having overcome, you may wear the crown." I confess my weakness. I
   would not fight in the hope of victory, lest some time or other I lose
   the victory. If I flee, I avoid the sword; if I stand, I must either
   overcome or fall. But what need is there for me to let go certainties
   and follow after uncertainties? Either with my shield or with my feet I
   must shun death. You who fight may either be overcome or may overcome.
   I who fly do not overcome, inasmuch as I fly; but I fly to make sure
   that I may not be overcome. There is no safety in sleep with a serpent
   beside you. Possibly he will not bite me, yet it is possible that after
   a time he may bite me. We call women mothers who are no older than
   sisters and daughters, [4985] and we do not blush to cloak our vices
   with the names of piety. What business has a monk in the women's cells?
   What is the meaning of secret conversation and looks which shun the
   presence of witnesses? Holy love has no restless desire. Moreover, what
   we have said respecting lust we must apply to avarice, and to all vices
   which are avoided by solitude. We therefore keep clear of the crowded
   cities, that we may not be compelled to do what we are urged to do, not
   so much by nature as by choice.

   17. At the request of the reverend presbyters, as I have said, I have
   devoted to the dictation of these remarks the labour of a single night,
   for my brother Sisinnius is hastening his departure for Egypt, where he
   has relief to give to the saints, and is impatient to be gone. If it
   were not so, however, the subject itself was so openly blasphemous as
   to call for the indignation of a writer rather than a multitude of
   proofs. But if Dormitantius wakes up that he may again abuse me, and if
   he thinks fit to disparage me with that same blasphemous mouth with
   which he pulls to pieces Apostles and martyrs, I will spend upon him
   something more than this short lucubration. I will keep vigil for a
   whole night in his behalf and in behalf of his companions, whether they
   be disciples or masters, who think no man to be worthy of Christ's
   ministry unless he is married and his wife is seen to be with child.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4944] Is. xiii. 21, 22, and xxxiv. 14-16.

   [4945] Is. xix. 21. Sept.

   [4946] Quintilian, the rhetorician, was born at Calagurris, in Spain,
   but not the same as the birthplace of Vigilantius.

   [4947] Combining the cheating tavern-keeper with the heretic.

   [4948] Jerem. v. 8.

   [4949] Ps. xxxii. 9.

   [4950] Ibid.

   [4951] Letter CXVII.

   [4952] From convenio, to come together.

   [4953] Acts xiv. 11.

   [4954] Acts x. 26.

   [4955] Matt. xxii. 32.

   [4956] Apoc. xiv. 4.

   [4957] Another reading is, "Shut up in the altar."

   [4958] Apoc. vi. 10.

   [4959] Ex. xxxii. 30 sqq.

   [4960] Acts vii. 59, 60.

   [4961] Acts xxvii. 37.

   [4962] ix. 4.

   [4963] John xi. 11.

   [4964] 1 Thess. iv. 13.

   [4965] vii. 35 sq. The passage occurs in the Ethiopic and Arabic
   versions, not in the Latin. It was probably rejected in later times for
   dogmatic reasons.

   [4966] The chief of the Egyptian Gnostics.

   [4967] Rom. x. 2.

   [4968] Matt. xxvi. 8; Mark xiv. 4.

   [4969] Rom. xiv. 5. Let each man be fully assured in his own mind. R.V.

   [4970] Matt. xxv. 1.

   [4971] Luke xii. 35.

   [4972] John v. 35.

   [4973] Ps. cxix. 105.

   [4974] i.e. antidote to the scorpion's bite.

   [4975] Letter CIX.

   [4976] Acts xxiv. 17, 18.

   [4977] Ps. i. 2.

   [4978] Deut. xviii. 2 sq.

   [4979] 2 Cor. viii. 14.

   [4980] Gal. vi. 10.

   [4981] Luke xvi. 9.

   [4982] Ps. xli. 9.

   [4983] Matt. xix. 21.

   [4984] Matt. xx. 16; xxii. 14.

   [4985] He seems to mean that monks spoke of young ladies as Mothers of
   the Convents, so as to be able to frequent their society without
   reproach.
     __________________________________________________________________

   To Pammachius Against John of Jerusalem.

   ------------------------

   Introduction.

   The letter against John of Jerusalem was written about the year 398 or
   399, and was a product of the Origenistic controversy. Its immediate
   occasion was the visit of Epiphanius, bishop of Salamis in Cyprus, at
   Jerusalem, in 394. The bishop preached, in the Church of the
   Resurrection (§11), a pointed sermon against Origenism, which was
   thought to be so directly aimed at John that the latter sent his
   archdeacon to remonstrate with the preacher (§14). After many unseemly
   scenes, Epiphanius advised Jerome and his friends to separate from
   their bishop (§39). But how were they to have the ministrations of the
   Church? This difficulty was surmounted by Epiphanius, who took Jerome's
   brother to the monastery which he had founded at Ad, in the diocese of
   Eleutheropolis, and there ordained him against his will, even using
   force to overcome his opposition (Jerome, Letter LI. 1). Epiphanius
   attempted to defend his action (Jerome, Letter LI. 2), but John, after
   some time, appealed to Alexandria against Jerome and his supporters as
   schismatics. The bishop, Theophilus, at once took the side of John: but
   a letter, written by his emissary Isidore and intended for John, fell
   into the hands of Jerome (§37). The letter showed that Isidore was
   coming as a mere partisan of John, and Jerome, therefore, treated both
   it and the bearer with secret contempt. The dispute was thus prolonged
   for about four years, and, after some attempts at reconciliation, and
   the exhibition of much bitterness, amounting to the practical
   excommunication of Jerome and his friends, the dispute was stopped,
   perhaps by Theophilus, perhaps through the influence of Melania. The
   letter written to Pammachius at Rome, in 397 or 398, against John, was
   abruptly broken off, and it is almost certain that it was never
   published during Jerome's lifetime. Jerome afterwards had so much
   influence with Theophilus that we find him interceding for John, who
   had fallen under the Pontiff's displeasure (Letter LXXXVI. 1).

   The date of this treatise is the subject of controversy. In §1 Jerome
   says that he wrote "after three years," that is, three years from the
   visit of Epiphanius to Jerusalem, which was in 394. This would give the
   date 397. At §14, also, he says that Epiphanius had been brooding over
   his wrongs for three years. Another note of time is found in the words
   of §43, that John had "lately" sought to obtain a sentence of exile
   against Jerome from "that wild beast who threatened the necks of the
   whole world," that is, the Prefect Rufinus, who died at the end of 395.
   All these statements point to the year 397. On the other hand, at §17,
   he speaks of his "Commentaries" on Ecclesiastes and Ephesians as having
   been written "about (ferme) ten years ago"; and the preface to
   Ecclesiastes says that he had read Ecclesiastes with Blesilla at Rome
   "about (ferme) five years ago," consequently, fifteen years before the
   writing of this treatise. Blesilla's death was in 384. The reading of
   Ecclesiastes may, therefore, have been in 383. And the fifteen years
   would bring us to 398. Also, at §41, Jerome says, addressing John. "You
   seem to have slept for thirteen years," implying that it was for
   thirteen years that the state of things complained of by John had
   existed, that is, the presence of the monks in his diocese, or, at
   least, their leaving their own dioceses. Jerome left Antioch, the
   diocese of his ordination, at the end of 385 or beginning of 386; these
   thirteen years, therefore, bring us to 399, the date adopted by
   Vallarsi. There is, however, an intimation in "Pallad. Hist. Laus.," c.
   117, that Melania, the friend of Rufinus, gave assistance in the matter
   of "the schism of nearly 400 monks who followed Paulinus," which is
   admitted to relate to the schism at Bethlehem, caused by the question
   of the ordination of Paulinianus. We know that Melania and Rufinus left
   Jerusalem early in 397, and that, before their departure, Jerome and
   Rufinus were reconciled. It would, therefore, seem most probable that
   the treatise, which is written with so much animosity against John,
   Rufinus's fellow-worker, and contains invidious allusions to Rufinus
   himself (§11, "your friends, who grin like dogs and turn up their
   noses," Jerome's constant description of Rufinus), was written before
   the reconciliation of Rufinus and Jerome, that is, in the end of 386 or
   the beginning of 387, and that it was broken off and kept unpublished
   because the situation had changed. Vallarsi places it in 399. He quotes
   the passages which make for the later date, but strangely omits the
   more definite statements which make for the earlier. It should be added
   that the letter of Jerome (LXXXII.) to Theophilus is evidently written
   at the same time, and under the same feelings, as this treatise. and,
   if the arguments above given are valid, that letter must be placed in
   397, not in 399, as stated in the note prefixed to it. The short letter
   (LXXXVI.) to Theophilus is, in that case, probably to be placed in 398
   or 399, rather than 401, as there stated.

   The treatise is a letter to Pammachius, who had been disturbed by the
   complaints of Bishop John to Siricius, bishop of Rome, against Jerome.
   Jerome begins (1) by pleading necessity for his attack on the bishop.
   Epiphanius has accused him of heresy (2). Let him answer plainly (3),
   for it is pride alone (4) which prevents this. It is said that John's
   letter of explanation or apology was approved by Theophilus (5); but it
   did not touch the point, that is, the accusation of Origenism. Only
   three points are treated (6), and Epiphanius adduced eight--namely (7)
   Origen's opinions (i.) that the Son does not see the Father; (ii.) that
   souls are confined in earthly bodies, as in a prison; (iii.) that the
   devil may be saved; (iv.) that the skins with which God clothed Adam
   and Eve were human bodies; (v.) that the body in the resurrection will
   be without sex; (vi.) that the descriptions of Paradise are
   allegorical: trees meaning angels, and rivers the heavenly virtues;
   (vii) that the waters above and below the firmament are angels and
   devils; (viii.) that the image of God was altogether lost at the Fall.
   John, instead of answering on the first head, merely expressed his
   faith in the Trinity (8, 9), and all through tries to make out (10)
   that the question between him and Epiphanius relates merely to the
   ordination of Paulinianus. Jerome then relates the extraordinary scenes
   of the altercation between Epiphanius and John (11-14). He then turns
   to the Origenistic notions that angels are cast down into human souls
   (15, 16), that the spirits of men pass into the heavenly bodies (17)
   and that the souls of men had a previous existence (18), and pass up
   and down in the scale of creation (19, 20). John, instead of answering
   on these points, contents himself with protesting against Manichæism
   (21.) Jerome presses him on the question of the origin of souls (22),
   pronouncing rashly for creationism. He then passes to the question of
   the state of the body after the resurrection (23), asserting the
   restoration of the flesh as it now is (24-27), both in the case of
   Christ (28) and in our own, adducing testimonies from the Old Testament
   (29-32), and discussing the appearances of our Lord after His
   resurrection (34-36). He then passes to a detailed examination of
   John's letter or "Apology" to Theophilus (37), quoting its words, and
   telling the story of the mission of Isidore (37, 38), and the attempts
   of the Count Archelaus to make peace (39). The ordination of
   Paulinianus, on which John lays stress, is a subterfuge (40, 41). The
   schism is due to the heretical tendencies of the bishop, who is
   everywhere denounced by Epiphanius (42, 43).

   The letter is, throughout, violent and contemptuous in its tone, with
   an arrogant assumption that the writer is in possession of the whole
   truth on the difficult subject on which he writes, and that he has a
   right to demand from his bishop a confession of faith on each point on
   which he chooses to catechise him. Its importance lies in the fact that
   it, to a large extent, fixed the belief of churchmen on the points it
   deals with, and the mode of dealing with supposed heresy, for more than
   a thousand years.

   1. If, according to the [4986] Apostle Paul, we cannot pray as we feel,
   and speech does not express the thoughts of our own minds, how much
   more dangerous is it to judge of another man's heart, and to trace and
   explain the meaning of the particular words and expressions which he
   uses? The nature of man is prone to mercy, and in considering another's
   sin, every one commiserates himself. Accordingly, if you blame one who
   offends in word, a man will say it was only simplicity; if you tax a
   man with craft, he to whom you speak will not admit that there is
   anything more in it than ignorance, so that he may avoid the suspicion
   of malice. And it will thus come to pass that you, the accuser, are
   made a slanderer, and the censured party is regarded, not as a heretic,
   but merely as a man without culture. You know, Pammachius, you know
   that it is not enmity or the lust of glory which leads me to engage in
   this work, but that I have been stimulated by your letters and that I
   act out of the fervour of my faith; and, if possible, I would have all
   understand that I cannot be blamed for impatience and rashness, seeing
   that I speak only after the lapse of three years. In fact, if you had
   not told me that the minds of many are troubled at the "Apology" which
   I am about to discuss, and are tossing to and fro on a sea of doubt, I
   had determined to persist in silence.

   2. So away with [4987] Novatus, who would not hold out a hand to the
   erring! perish [4988] Montanus and his mad women! Montanus, who would
   hurl the fallen into the abyss that they may never rise again. Every
   day we all sin and make some slip or other. Being then merciful to
   ourselves, we are not rigorous towards others; nay, rather, we pray and
   beseech [4989] him either to simply tell us our own faults, or to
   openly defend those of other men. I dislike ambiguities; I dislike to
   be told what is capable of two meanings. Let us contemplate with [4990]
   unveiled face the glory of the Lord. Once upon a time the people of
   Israel halted [4991] between two opinions. But, said Elias, which is by
   interpretation the strong one of the Lord, [4992] "How long halt ye
   between two opinions? If the Lord be God, go after him; but if Baal,
   follow him." And the Lord himself says concerning the Jews, [4993] "the
   strange children lied unto me; the strange children became feeble, and
   limped out of their by-paths." If there really is no ground for
   suspecting him of heresy (as I wish and believe), why does he not speak
   out my opinion in my own words? He calls it simplicity; I interpret it
   as artfulness. He wishes to convince me that his belief is sound; let
   his speech, then, also be sound. And, indeed, if the ambiguity attached
   to a single word, or a single statement, or two or three, I could be
   indulgent on the score of ignorance; nor would I judge what is obscure
   or doubtful by the standard of what is certain and clear. But, as
   things are, this "simplicity" is nothing but a platform trick, like
   walking on tiptoe over eggs or standing corn; there is doubt and
   suspicion everywhere. You might suppose he was not writing an
   exposition of the faith, but was writing a disputation on some
   imaginary theme. What he is now so keen upon, we learnt long ago in the
   schools. He puts on our own armour to fight against us. Even if his
   faith be correct, and he speaks with circumspection and reserve, his
   extreme care rouses my suspicions. [4994] "He that walketh uprightly,
   walketh boldly." It is folly to bear a bad name for nothing. A charge
   is brought against him of which he is not conscious. Let him
   confidently deny the charge which hangs upon a single word, and freely
   turn the tables against his adversary. Let the one exhibit the same
   boldness in repelling the charge which the other shows in advancing it.
   And when he has said all that he wishes and purposes to say, and such
   things as are above suspicion, if his opponent persists in slander, let
   him try conclusions in open court. I wish no one to sit still under an
   imputation of heresy, lest, if he say nothing, his want of openness be
   interpreted, amongst those who are not aware of his innocence, as the
   consciousness of guilt, although there is no need to demand the
   presence of a man and to reduce him to silence when you have his
   letters in your possession.

   3. We all know what [4995] he wrote to you, what charge he brought
   against you, wherein (as you maintain) he has slandered you. Answer the
   points, one by one; follow the footsteps of this letter; leave not a
   single jot or tittle of the slander unnoticed. For if you are careless,
   and accidentally pass over any thing as I believe you on your oath to
   have done, he will immediately cry out: "Now, now, you have got the
   worst of it, the whole thing turns upon this." Words do not sound the
   same in the ears of friends and enemies. An enemy looks for a knot even
   in a bulrush; a friend judges even crooked to be straight. It is a
   saying of secular writers that lovers are blind in their judgments,
   though, perhaps, you are too busy with the sacred books to pay any
   attention to such literature. You should never boast of what your
   friends think of you. That is true testimony which comes from the lips
   of foes. On the contrary, if a friend speaks in your behalf he will be
   considered not as a witness but a judge or a partisan. This is the sort
   of thing your enemies will say, who perhaps give no credit to you, and
   only wish to vex you. But I, whom you say you have never willingly
   injured, yet whose name you are always bound to bandy about in your
   letters, advise you either to openly proclaim the faith of the Church,
   or to speak as you believe. For that cautious mincing and weighing of
   words may, no doubt, deceive the unlearned; but a careful hearer and
   reader will quickly detect the snare, and will show in open daylight
   the subterranean mines by which truth is overthrown. The Arians (no one
   knows more about them than you) for a long time pretended that they
   condemned the [4996] Homoousion on account of the offence it gave, and
   they besmeared poisonous error with honeyed words. But at last the
   snake uncoiled itself, and its deadly head, which lay concealed under
   all its folds, was pierced by the sword of the Spirit. The Church, as
   you know, welcomes penitents, and is so overwhelmed by the multitude of
   sinners that it is forced, in the interests of the misguided flocks, to
   be lenient to the wounds of the shepherds. [4997] Ancient and modern
   heresy observes the same rule--the people hear one thing, the priests
   preach another.

   4. And first, before I translate and insert in this book the letter
   which you wrote to Bishop Theophilus, and show you that I understand
   your excessive care and circumspection, I should like a word of
   expostulation with you. What is the meaning of this towering arrogance
   which makes you refuse to reply to those who question you respecting
   the faith? How is it that you regard almost as public enemies the vast
   multitude of brethren, and the bands of monks, who refuse to
   communicate with you in Palestine? The Son of God, for the sake of one
   sick sheep, leaving the ninety and nine on the mountains, endured the
   buffeting, the cross, the scourge; He took up the burden, and patiently
   carried on His shoulders to heaven the voluptuous woman that was a
   sinner. Is it for you to act the "most reverend father in God," the
   fastidious prelate; to stand apart in your wealth and wisdom, in your
   grandeur and your learning; to frown superciliously upon your fellow
   servants, and scarce vouchsafe a glance to those who have been redeemed
   with the blood of your Lord? Is this what you have learnt from the
   Apostles' precept to be [4998] "ready always to give answer to every
   man that asketh you a reason concerning the hope that is in you"?
   Suppose we do, as you pretend, seek occasion, and that, under the
   pretext of zeal for the faith, we are sowing strife, framing a schism,
   and fomenting quarrels. Then take away the occasion from those who wish
   for an occasion; so that having given satisfaction on the point of
   faith, and solved all the difficulties in which you are involved, you
   may show clearly to all that the dispute is not one of doctrine, but of
   [4999] order. But perhaps when questioned concerning the faith, you say
   that it is from wise forethought that you hold your tongue, so that it
   may not be said that you have proved yourself a heretic--in as much as
   you make satisfaction to your accusers. If that be so, then men ought
   not to refute any charges of which they are accused, lest, having
   denied them, they may be held to be guilty. The accusations of the
   laity, deacons, and presbyters, are, I suppose, beneath your notice.
   For you can, as you are perpetually boasting, make a thousand clerics
   in an hour. But you have to answer Epiphanius, our father in God, who,
   in the letters which he sent, openly calls you a heretic. Certainly you
   are not his superior in respect of years, of learning, of his exemplary
   life, or of the judgment of the whole world. If it is a question of
   age, you are a young man writing to an old one. If it is one of
   knowledge, you are a person not so very accomplished writing to a
   learned man, although your partisans maintain that you are a more
   finished speaker than Demosthenes, more sharp-witted than Chrysippus,
   wiser than Plato, and perhaps have persuaded you that they are right.
   As regards his life and devotion to the faith, I will say no more, that
   I may not seem to be seeking to wound you. At the time when the whole
   East (except our fathers in God Athanasius and Paulinus) was overrun by
   the Arian and Eunomian heresies; when you did not hold communion with
   the Westerns; then, in the very worst of the exile which made them
   confessors, he, though a simple convent priest, gained the ear of
   Eutychius, and afterwards as bishop of Cyprus was unmolested by Valens.
   For he was always so highly venerated that heretics on the throne
   thought it would redound to their own disgrace if they persecuted such
   a man. Write therefore to him. Answer his letter. So let the rest
   understand your purpose and judge of your eloquence and wisdom; do not
   keep all your accomplishments to yourself. Why, when you are challenged
   in one quarter, do you turn your arms towards another? A question is
   put to you in Palestine, your answer is given in Egypt. When some are
   blear-eyed, you anoint the eyes of others who are not affected. If you
   tell another what is meant to give us satisfaction, such action springs
   entirely from pride; if you tell him what we do not ask for, it is
   entirely uncalled for.

   5. But you say "the bishop of Alexandria approved of my letter." What
   did he approve of? Your correct utterances against Arius, Photinus, and
   Manichæus. For who, at this time of day, accuses you of being an Arian?
   Who now fastens on you the guilt of Photinus and Manichæus? Those
   faults were long ago corrected, those enemies were shattered. You were
   not so foolish as to openly defend a heresy which you knew was
   offensive to the whole Church. You knew that if you had done this, you
   must have been immediately removed, and your heart was upon the
   pleasures of your episcopal throne. You so tuned your expressions as to
   neither displease the simple, nor offend your own incontestably marked
   by deceit and slipperiness; what, then, are we to do with the remaining
   five, with regard to which, because no opportunity was afforded for
   ambiguity, supporters. You wrote well, but nothing to the purpose. How
   was the bishop of Alexandria to know of what you were accused, or what
   things they were of which a confession was demanded from you? You ought
   to have set forth in detail the charges brought against you, and then
   have met them one by one. There is an old story which tells how a
   certain man, who, when he was speaking fluently, was carried along by a
   torrent of words, without touching the question before the court, and
   thus drew the wise remark from the judge, "Excellent! excellent! but to
   what purpose is all this excellence?" Quacks have but one lotion for
   all affections of the eyes. He who is accused of many things, and in
   dissipating the charges passes over some, confesses all that he omits
   to mention. Did you not reply to the letter of Epiphanius, and yourself
   choose the points for refutation? No doubt, in replying, you rested on
   the axiom, that no man is so brave as to put the sword to his own
   throat. Choose which alternative you like. You shall have your choice:
   you either replied to the letter of Epiphanius, or you did not. If you
   did reply, why did you take no notice of the most important, and the
   most numerous, of the charges brought against you? If you did not
   reply, what becomes of your "Apology," of which you boast amongst the
   simple, and which you are scattering broadcast amongst those who do not
   understand the matter?

   6. The questions for you to answer were arranged, as I shall presently
   show, under eight heads. You touch only three, and pass on. As regards
   the rest, you maintain a magnificent silence. If you had with perfect
   frankness replied to seven, I should still cling to the charge which
   remained; and what you said nothing about, that I should hold to be the
   truth. But as things are, you have caught the wolf by the ears; you can
   neither hold fast, nor dare let go. With a sort of careless security
   and an air of abstraction, you skim over and touch the surface of three
   in which there is nothing or but little of importance. And your
   procedure is so dark and close that you confess more by your silence
   than you rebut by your arguments. Every one has the right forthwith to
   say to you, [5000] "If the light that is in thee be darkness, how great
   is the darkness." Even in answering three little questions, respecting
   which you seemed to say something, you are not clear from suspicion and
   from blame, but your replies are and you were therefore unable to cheat
   your hearers, you preferred to maintain unbroken silence rather than
   openly confess what had been covered in obscurity?

   7. The questions relate to the passages in the [5001] Peri Archon. The
   first is this, "for as it is unfitting to say that the Son can see the
   Father, so neither is it meet to think that the Holy Spirit can see the
   Son." The second point is the statement that souls are tied up in the
   body as in a prison; and that before man was made in Paradise they
   dwelt amongst rational creatures in the heavens. Wherefore, afterwards
   to console itself, the soul says in the Psalms, [5002] "Before I was
   humbled, I went wrong"; and [5003] "Return, my soul, to thy rest"; and
   [5004] "Lead my soul out of prison"; and similarly elsewhere. Thirdly,
   he says that both the devil and demons will some time or other repent,
   and ultimately reign with the saints. Fourthly, he interprets the coats
   of skin, with which Adam and Eve were clothed after their fall and
   ejection from Paradise, to be human bodies, and we are to suppose of
   course that previously, in Paradise, they had neither flesh, sinews,
   nor bones. Fifthly, he most openly denies the resurrection of the flesh
   and the bodily structure, and the distinction of senses, both in his
   explanation of the first Psalm, and in many other of his treatises.
   Sixthly, he so allegorises Paradise as to destroy historical truth,
   understanding angels instead of trees, heavenly virtues instead of
   rivers, and he overthrows all that is contained in the history of
   Paradise by his figurative interpretation. Seventhly, he thinks that
   the waters which are said in Scripture to be above the heavens are holy
   and supernal essences, while those which are above the earth and
   beneath the earth are, on the contrary, demoniacal essences. The eighth
   is Origen's cavil that the image and likeness of God, in which man was
   created, was lost, and was no longer in man after he was expelled from
   Paradise.

   8. These are the arrows with which you are pierced; these the weapons
   with which throughout the whole letter you are wounded; or I should
   rather say Epiphanius throws himself as a suppliant at your knees, and
   casts his hoary locks beneath your feet, and, for a time laying aside
   his episcopal dignity, prays for your salvation in words such as these:
   "Grant to me and to yourself the favour of your salvation; save
   yourself, as it is written, from this crooked generation, [5005] and
   forsake the heresy of Origen, and all heresies, dearly beloved." And
   lower down, "In the defence of heresy you kindle hatred against me, and
   destroy that love which I had towards you; insomuch that you would make
   us even repent of holding communion with you who so resolutely defend
   the errors and doctrines of Origen." Tell me, prince of arguers, to
   which, out of the eight sections, you have replied. For the present, I
   say nothing of the rest. Take the first blasphemy--that the Son cannot
   see the Father, nor the Holy Spirit the Son. By what weapons of yours
   has it been pierced? the answer we get is, "We believe that the Holy
   and Adorable Trinity are of the same substance; that they are
   co-eternal, and of the same glory and Godhead, and we anathematize
   those who say that there is any greatness, smallness, inequality, or
   aught that is visible in the Godhead of the Trinity. But as we say the
   Father is incorporeal, invisible, and eternal; so we say the Son and
   Holy Spirit are incorporeal, invisible, and eternal." If you did not
   say this, you would not hold to the Church. I do not ask whether there
   was not a time when you refused to say this. I will not discuss the
   question, whether you were fond of those who preached such doctrines;
   on whose side you were when, for expressing those sentiments, they
   underwent banishment; or who the man was that, when the presbyter Theo
   preached in the Church that the Holy Spirit is God, closed his ears,
   and excitedly rushed out of doors that he might not so much as hear the
   impiety. I recognize a man, as one may say, as one of the faithful,
   even though his repentance comes late. [5006] That unhappy man
   Prætextatus, who died after he had been chosen consul, a profane person
   and an idolater, was wont in sport to say to blessed Pope Damascus,
   "Make me bishop of Rome, and I will at once be a Christian." Why do
   you, with many words and intricate periods, take the trouble to show me
   that you are not an Arian? Either deny that the accused said what is
   imputed to him, or, if he did give utterance to such sentiments,
   condemn him for so speaking. You have still to learn how intense is the
   zeal of the orthodox. Listen to the Apostle: [5007] "If I or an angel
   from heaven bring you another gospel than that we have declared, let
   him be anathema." You would extenuate the fault and hide the name of
   the guilty party: as though everything were right and no one were
   accused of blasphemy, you frame, in artificial language, an
   uncalled-for profession of your faith. Speak out at once, and let your
   letter thus begin: "Let him be accursed who has dared to write such
   things." Pure faith is impatient of delay. As soon as the scorpion
   appears, he must be crushed under foot. David, who was proved to be a
   man after God's own heart, says: [5008] "Do not I hate those that hate
   thee, O Lord, and did not I pine away over thine enemies? I hated them
   with a perfect hatred." Had I heard my father, or mother, or brother
   say such things against my Master Christ, I would have broken their
   blasphemous jaws like those of a mad dog, and my hand should have been
   amongst the first lifted up against them. They who said to father and
   mother, [5009] "We know you not," these men fulfilled the will of the
   Lord. [5010] He that loveth father or mother more than Christ, is not
   worthy of Him.

   9. It is alleged that your master, whom you call a Catholic, and whom
   you resolutely defend, said, "the Son sees not the Father, and the Holy
   Spirit sees not the Son." And you tell me that the Father is invisible,
   the Son invisible, the Holy Ghost invisible, as though the angels, both
   cherubim and seraphim, were not also, in accordance with their nature,
   invisible to our eyes. David was certainly in doubt even as regards the
   appearance of the heavens: [5011] "I shall see," he says, "the heavens,
   the works of Thy fingers." I shall see, not I see. I shall see when
   with unveiled face I shall behold the glory of the Lord: but [5012] now
   we see in part, and we know in part. The question is whether the Son
   sees the Father, and you say "The Father is invisible." It is disputed
   whether the Holy Spirit sees the Son, and you answer "The Son is
   invisible." The point at issue is, whether the Trinity have mutually
   the vision of one another; human ears cannot endure such blasphemy, and
   you say the Trinity is invisible. You wander in the realms of praise in
   all other directions; you spend your eloquence on things which no one
   wants to hear about. You put your hearer off the scent, to avoid
   telling us what we ask for. But granted that all this is superfluous.
   We make you a present of the fact that you are not an Arian; nay, even
   more, that you never have been. We allow that in the explanation of the
   first section no suspicion rests upon you, and that all that you said
   was frank and free from error. We speak to you with equal frankness.
   Did our father in God, Epiphanius, accuse you of being an Arian? Did he
   fasten upon you the heresy of [5013] Eunomius, the Godless, or that of
   [5014] Aerius? The point of the whole letter is that you follow the
   erroneous doctrines of Origen, and are associated with others in this
   heresy. Why, when a question is put to you on one point, do you give an
   answer about another; and, as if you were speaking to fools, hide the
   charges contained in the letters, and tell us what you said in the
   church in the presence of Epiphanius? A confession of faith is demanded
   of you, and you inflict upon us your very eloquent dissertations. I
   beseech my readers to remember the judgment seat of the Lord, and as
   you know that you must be judged for the judgment you give, favour
   neither me nor my opponent, and consider not the persons of the
   arguers, but the case itself. Let us then continue what we began.

   10. You write in your letter that, before Paulinianus was made a
   presbyter, the pope Epiphanius never took you to task in connection
   with Origen's errors. To begin with, this is doubtful, and I have to
   consider which of the two men I should believe. He says that he did
   object, you deny it; he brings forward witnesses, you will not listen
   to them when they are produced; he even relates that [5015] another
   besides yourself was arraigned by him: you refuse to admit this in the
   case of either; he sends a letter to you by one of his clergy, and
   demands an answer: you are silent, dare not open your lips, and,
   challenged in Palestine, speak at Alexandria. Which of you is to be
   believed is not for me to say. I suppose that you yourself would not,
   in the face of so distinguished a man, venture to claim truth for
   yourself, and impute falsehood to him. But it is possible that each
   speaks from his own point of view. I will call a witness against you,
   and that witness is yourself. For if there were no dispute about
   doctrines, if you had not roused the anger of an old man, if he had
   given you no reply, what need was there for you, who do not excel in
   gifts of speech, to discuss in a single sermon in the church the whole
   circle of doctrine--the Trinity, the assumption of our Lord's body, the
   cross, hell, the nature of angels, the condition of souls, the
   Saviour's resurrection and our own, and this as taking place on this
   earth (topics perhaps omitted in your manuscript) in the presence of
   the masses, in the presence, too, of a man of such distinction? and to
   speak with such perfect assurance and to gallop through it all without
   stopping to draw breath? What shall we say of the ancient writers of
   the Church, who were scarce able to explain single difficulties in many
   volumes? What of the vessel of election, the Gospel trumpet, the
   roaring of our lion, the thunderer of the Gentiles, the river of
   Christian eloquence, who, when confronted by the [5016] mystery
   concealed from ages and generations, and by [5017] the depth of the
   riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God, rather marvels at it than
   discusses it? What of Isaiah, who pointed beforehand to the Virgin?
   That single thing was too much for him, and he says, [5018] "Who shall
   declare his generation?" In our age a poor mannikin has been found,
   who, with one turn of the tongue, and a brilliancy exceeding that of
   the sun, discourses on all ecclesiastical questions. If no one asked
   you for the display, and everything was quiet, you were foolish to
   enter voluntarily upon so hazardous a discussion. If, on the other
   hand, the object of your speaking was the satisfaction you owed to the
   faith, it follows that the cause of strife was not the ordination of a
   [5019] priest, who, it is certain, was ordained long after. You have
   deceived only those who were not on the spot, and your letters flatter
   the ears of strangers only.

   11. We were present (we know the whole case) when the bishop Epiphanius
   spoke against Origen in your church, and he was the ostensible, you the
   real object of attack. You and your crew grinned like dogs, drew in
   your nostrils, scratched your heads, nodded to one another, and talked
   of the "silly old man." Did you not, in front of the Lord's tomb, send
   your archdeacon to tell him to cease discussing such matters? What
   bishop ever gave such a command to one of his own presbyters in the
   presence of the people? When you were going from the Church of the
   Resurrection to the Church of the Holy Cross, and a crowd of all ages,
   and both sexes, was flowing to meet him, presenting to him their little
   ones, kissing his feet, plucking the fringes of his garments, and when
   he could not stir a step forward, and could hardly stand against the
   waves of the surging crowd, were not you so tortured by envy as to
   exclaim against "the vainglorious old man"? And you were not ashamed to
   tell him to his face that his stopping was of set purpose and design.
   Pray recall that day when the people who had been called together were
   kept waiting until the seventh hour by the mere hope of hearing
   Epiphanius, and the subject of the harangue you then delivered. You
   spoke, forsooth, with indignant rage against the Anthropomorphites,
   who, with rustic simplicity, think that God has actually the members of
   which we read in Scripture; and showed by your eyes, hands, and every
   gesture that you had the old man in view, and wished him to be
   suspected of that most foolish heresy. When through sheer fatigue, with
   dry month, head thrown back, and quivering lips, to the satisfaction of
   the whole people, who had longed for the end, you at last wound up, how
   did the crazy and "silly old man" treat you? He rose to indicate that
   he would say a few words, and after saluting the assembly with voice
   and hand proceeded thus: "All that has been said by one who is my
   brother in the episcopate, but my son in point of years, against the
   heresy of the Anthropomorphites, has been well and faithfully spoken,
   and my voice, too, condemns that heresy. But it is fair that, as we
   condemn this heresy so we should also condemn the perverse doctrines of
   Origen." You cannot, I think, have forgotten what a burst of laughter,
   what shouts of applause ensued. This is what you call in your letter
   his speaking to the people anything he chose, no matter what it might
   be. He, forsooth, was mad because he contradicted you in your own
   kingdom. "Anything he chose, no matter what." Either give him praise,
   or blame. Why, here as well as elsewhere, do you move with so uncertain
   a step? If what he said was good, why not openly proclaim it? if evil,
   why not boldly censure it? And yet, let us note with what wisdom,
   modesty, and humility this pillar of truth and faith, who dares to say
   that so illustrious a man speaks to the people what he chooses, alludes
   to himself. "One day I was speaking in his presence; and, taking
   occasion from some words in the lesson for the day, I expressed, in his
   hearing and in that of the whole Church, such views respecting the
   faith and all the doctrines of the Church as by the grace of God I
   unceasingly teach in the Church, and in my catechetical lectures."

   12. What, I ask, is the meaning of this effrontery and bombast? All
   philosophers and orators attack Gorgias of Leontini for daring openly
   to pledge himself to answer any question which any person might choose
   to put to him. If the honour of the priesthood and respect for your
   title did not restrain me, and if I did not know what the Apostle says,
   [5020] "I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest: for it is
   written, Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people," how
   loudly and indignantly might I complain of what you relate! You, on the
   contrary, disparage the dignity of your title by the contempt which you
   throw, both in word and deed, on one who is almost the father of the
   whole episcopate, and a monument of the sanctity of former days. You
   say that on a certain day, when something in the lesson for the day
   stirred you up, you made a discourse in his hearing, and in that of the
   whole Church, concerning the faith and all the doctrines of the Church.
   After this we cannot but wonder at the weakness of Demosthenes; for we
   are told that he spent a long time in elaborating his splendid oration
   against Æschines. We are quite mistaken in looking up to Tully; for his
   merit, according to Cornelius Nepos, who was present, was nothing but
   this, that he delivered his famous defence of the seditious tribune
   Cornelius, almost word for word as it was published. Behold a Lysias
   [5021] and a Gracchus raised up for us! or, to name one of more modern
   days, Quintus Aterius, [5022] the man who had all his powers at hand
   like a stock of ready money, so that he needed some one to tell him
   when to stop, and of whom Cæsar Augustus said very well, "Our friend
   Quintus must have the break put on."

   13. Is there any man in his right senses who would declare that in a
   single sermon he had discussed the faith and all the doctrines of the
   Church? Pray show me what that lesson is which is so seasoned with the
   whole savour of Scripture that its occurrence in the service induced
   you to enter the arena and put your wit to the hazard. And if you had
   not been overwhelmed by the torrent of your eloquence, you might have
   been convinced that it was impossible for you to speak upon the whole
   circle of doctrines without any deliberation. But how stands the case?
   You promise one thing and present another. Our custom is, for the space
   of forty days, to deliver public lectures to those who are to be
   baptized on the doctrine of the Holy and Adorable Trinity. If the
   lesson for the day stimulated you to discuss all doctrines in a single
   hour, what necessity was there to repeat the instruction of the
   previous forty days? But if you meant to recapitulate what you had been
   saying during the whole of Lent, how could one lesson on a certain day
   "stir you up" to speak of all these doctrines? But even here his
   language is ambiguous; for possibly he took occasion, from the
   particular lesson, to go over summarily what he was accustomed to
   deliver in church to the candidates for baptism during the forty days
   of Lent. For it is eloquence all the same whether few things are said
   in many words, or many things in few words. There is another
   permissible meaning, that, as soon as the one lesson gave him the spur,
   he was fired with such oratorical zeal that for forty days he never
   ceased speaking. But, then, even the easy-going old man, who was
   hanging upon his lips, and longing to know what he had never heard
   before, must have almost fallen from his seat asleep. However, we must
   put up with it; perhaps this, also, is a case of the simplicity which
   we know to be his manner.

   14. Let us quote the rest, in which, after the labyrinths of his
   perplexing discussion, he expresses himself by no means ambiguously but
   openly, and thus concludes his wonderful homilies: "When we had thus
   spoken in his presence, and when out of the extreme honour which we
   paid him we invited him to speak after us, he praised our preaching,
   and said that he marvelled at it, and declared to all that it was the
   Catholic faith." The extreme honour you paid him is evidenced by the
   extreme insults offered to him, when through the archdeacon you bade
   him be silent, and loudly proclaimed that it was the love of praise
   which made him linger among the crowd. The present is the key to the
   past. For three whole years from that time he has brooded in silence
   [5023] over the wrongs he suffered, and, spurning all personal strife,
   has only asked for a more correct expression of your faith. You, with
   your endless resources, and making a profit out of the religion of the
   whole world, have been sending those very dignified envoys of yours
   hither and thither, and have been trying to awake the old man out of
   his sleep that he might answer you. And in truth it was right that as
   you had conferred such signal honour upon him he should praise your
   utterances, particularly such as were ex tempore. But as men have a way
   of sometimes praising what they do not approve, and of nourishing
   another's folly by meaningless commendation, he not only praised your
   utterances, but praised and marvelled at them as well; and what is
   more, to magnify the marvel, he declared to the whole people that they
   were in harmony with the Catholic faith. Whether he really said all
   this, we ourselves are witnesses. The fact is, he came to us half dead
   with dismay at your words, and saying that he had been too precipitate
   in communicating with you. And further, when he was much entreated by
   the whole monastery to return to you from Bethlehem, and was unable to
   resist the entreaties of so many, he did indeed return in the evening,
   but only to escape again at midnight. His letters to the pope Siricius
   prove the same thing, and if you read them you will see clearly in what
   sense he marvelled at your utterances and acknowledged them Catholic.
   But we are threshing chaff, and have spent many words in refuting
   gratuitous nonsense and old wives' fables.

   15. Let us pass on to the second point. Here, as though there were
   nothing for his consideration, he vapours, and vents himself
   unconcernedly, pretending to be asleep, so that he may lull his readers
   also into slumber. "But we were speaking of the other matters
   pertaining to the faith, that is to say, that all things visible and
   invisible, the heavenly powers and terrestrial creatures have one and
   the same creator, even God, that is, the Holy Trinity, as the blessed
   David says, [5024] By the word of the Lord were the heavens
   established, and all the host of them by the breath of His mouth'; and
   the creation of man is a simple proof of the same; for it was God
   Himself who took slime from the earth, and through the grace of His own
   inspiration bestowed on it a reasonable soul, and one endowed with free
   will; not a part of His own nature (as some impiously teach), but His
   own workmanship. And concerning the holy angels, the belief of
   Christians similarly follows Holy Scripture, which says of God, [5025]
   "Who maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flaming fire." Holy
   Scripture does not allow us to believe that their nature is
   unchangeable, for it says, [5026] "And angels which kept not their own
   principality, but left their proper habitation, He hath kept in
   everlasting bonds under darkness unto the judgment of the great day";
   we know, therefore, that they have changed, and having lost their own
   dignity and glory have become more like demons. But that the souls of
   men are caused by the fall of the angels, or by their conversion, we
   never believed, nor have we so taught (God forbid!), and we confess
   that the view is at variance with the teaching of the Church."

   16. We want to know whether souls, before man was made in paradise, and
   Adam was fashioned out of the earth, were among reasonable creatures;
   whether they had their own rank, lived, continued, subsisted; and
   whether the doctrine of Origen is true, who said that all reasonable
   creatures, incorporeal and invisible, if they grow remiss, little by
   little sink to a lower level, and, according to the character of the
   places to which they descend, take to themselves bodies. (For instance,
   that they may be at first ethereal, afterward aërial.) And that when
   they reach the neighbourhood of earth they are invested with grossest
   bodies, and last of all are tied to human flesh; and that the demons
   themselves who, of their own choice, together with their leader the
   devil, have forsaken the service of God, if they begin to amend a
   little, are clothed with human flesh, so that, when they have undergone
   a process of repentance after the resurrection, and after passing
   through the same circuit by which they reached the flesh, they may
   return to proximity to God, being released even from aërial and
   ethereal bodies; and that then every knee will bow to God, of things in
   heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth, and that God
   may be all to all. When these are the real questions, why do you pass
   over the points at issue, and, leaving the arena, fix yourself in the
   region of remote and utterly irrelevant discussion?

   17. You believe that one God made all creatures, visible and invisible.
   Arius, who says that all things were created through the Son, would
   also confess this. If you had been accused of holding Marcion's heresy,
   which introduces two Gods, the one the God of goodness, the other of
   justice, and asserts that the former is the Creator of things
   invisible, the latter of things visible, your answer would have been
   well adapted to satisfy me on a question of that sort. You believe it
   is the Trinity which creates the universe. Arians and Semi-Arians deny
   that, blasphemously maintaining that the Holy Spirit is not the
   Creator, but is Himself created. But who now lays it to your charge
   that you are an Arian? You say that the souls of men are not a part of
   the nature of God, as though you were now called a Manichæan by
   Epiphanius. You protest against those who assert that souls are made
   out of angels, and say that their nature, in its fall, becomes the
   substance of humanity. Don't conceal what you know, nor feign a
   simplicity which you do not possess. Origen never said that souls are
   made out of angels, since he teaches that the term angels describes an
   office, not a nature. For in his book Peri 'Archon he says that angels,
   and thrones, and dominions, powers and rulers of the world, and of
   darkness, and [5027] every name which is named, not only in this world,
   but in that which is to come, become the souls of those bodies which
   they have taken on either through their own desire or for the sake of
   their appointed duties; that the sun also, himself, and the moon, and
   the company of all the stars, are the souls of what were once
   reasonable and incorporeal creatures; and that though now subject to
   vanity, that is to say, to fiery bodies which we, in our ignorance and
   inexperience, call luminaries of the world, they shall be delivered
   from the bondage of corruption and brought to the liberty of the glory
   of the sons of God. Wherefore every creature groaneth and travaileth in
   pain together. And the Apostle laments, saying, [5028] "Wretched man
   that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" This is
   not the time to controvert this doctrine, which is partly heathen, and
   partly Platonic. About ten years ago in my "Commentary" on
   Ecclesiastes, and in my explanation of the Epistle to the Ephesians, I
   think my own views were made clear to thoughtful men.

   18. I now beg you, whose eloquence is so exuberant, and who expound the
   truth concerning all topics in the course of one sermon, to give an
   answer to your interrogators in concise and clear terms. When God
   formed man out of slime, and through the grace of His own inspiration
   gave him a soul, had that soul previously existed and subsisted which
   was afterwards bestowed by the inspiration of God, and where was it? or
   did it gain its capacity both to exist and to live from the power of
   God, on the sixth day, when the body was formed out of the slime? You
   are silent regarding this, and pretend you do not know what is wanted,
   and busy yourself with irrelevant questions. You leave Origen
   untouched, and rave against the absurdities of Marcion, Apollinaris,
   Eunomius, Manichæus, and the other heretics. You are asked for a hand
   and you put out a foot, and all the while covertly insinuate the
   doctrine to which you hold. You speak smooth things to plain men like
   us, but in such a way as in no degree to displease those of your own
   party.

   19. You say that demons rather than souls are made out of angels, as
   though you did not know that, according to Origen, the demons
   themselves are souls belonging to aërial bodies, and, after being
   demons, destined to become human souls if they repent. You write that
   the angels are mutable; and, under cover of a pious opinion, introduce
   an impiety by maintaining that, after the lapse of many ages, souls are
   produced not from the angels, but from whatever it was into which the
   angels were first changed. I wish to make my meaning clearer; suppose a
   person of the rank of tribune to be degraded through his own
   misconduct, and to pass through the several steps of the cavalry
   service until he becomes a private, does he all at once cease to be a
   tribune [5029] and become a recruit? No; but he is first colonel, then,
   successively, major officer of two hundred, captain, commissary,
   patrol, trooper, and, lastly, a recruit; and although our tribune
   eventually becomes a common soldier, still he did not pass from the
   rank of tribune to that of recruit, but to that of colonel. Origen uses
   Jacob's ladder to teach that reasonable creatures by slow degrees sink
   to the lowest step, that is to flesh and blood; and that it is
   impossible for any one to be suddenly precipitated from number one
   hundred to number one without reaching the last by passing through the
   successive numbers, as in descending the rounds of a ladder; and that
   they change their bodies as often as they change their resting-places
   in going from heaven to earth. These are the tricks and artifices by
   which you make us out to be [5030] "Pelusiots" and "beasts of burden"
   and "animal men" who do "not receive the things pertaining to the
   Spirit." [5031] You are the "people of Jerusalem," and can make a mock
   even of the angels. But your mysteries are being dragged into the
   light, and your doctrine, which is a mere conglomerate of heathen
   fables, is publicly exposed in the ears of Christians. What you so much
   admire we long ago despised when we found it in Plato. And we despised
   it because we received the foolishness of Christ. And we received the
   foolishness of Christ because [5032] the weakness of God is wiser than
   men. And is it not a shame for us, who are Christians and priests of
   God, to entangle ourselves in words of doubtful meaning, as though we
   were merely jesting; to keep our phrases balanced between two meanings,
   in a way which deceives the speaker himself more than his hearers?

   20. One of your company, when pressed by me to say what he thought
   concerning the soul, whether it had existed before the flesh, or not,
   replied that soul and body had existed together. I knew the man was a
   heretic, and was seeking to entangle me in my speech. At last I caught
   him saying that the soul gained that name from the time when it began
   to animate a body, whereas it was formerly called a demon, or angel of
   Satan, or spirit of fornication, or, on the other hand, dominion,
   power, agent of the spirit, or messenger. Well, but if the soul existed
   before Adam was made in Paradise (in any rank and condition), and lived
   and acted (for we cannot think that what is incorporeal and eternal is
   dull and torpid like a dormouse), there must have been some precedent
   cause to account for the soul, which at first had no body, being
   afterwards invested with a body. And if it is natural to the soul to be
   without a body, it must be contrary to nature for it to be in a body.
   If it is contrary to nature to be in a body, it follows that the
   resurrection of the body is contrary to nature. But the resurrection
   will not be contrary to nature; therefore, according to you, the body,
   which is contrary to nature, when it rises again will be without a
   soul.

   21. You say that the soul is not of the essence of God. Well! This is
   what we might expect, for you condemn the impious Manichæus, to make
   mention of whose name is pollution. You say that angels are not turned
   into souls. I agree to some extent, although I know what meaning you
   give to the words. But, now that we have learnt what you deny, we wish
   to know what you believe. "Having taken slime of the earth," you say,
   "God fashioned man, and through the grace of His own inbreathing
   bestowed upon him a rational soul, and through the grace of free will,
   not a portion of His own divine nature (as some impiously maintain),
   but His own handiwork." See how he goes out of his way to be eloquent
   about what we did not ask for. We know that God fashioned man out of
   the earth; we are aware that He breathed into his face, and man became
   a living soul; we are not ignorant that the soul is characterized by
   reason and free choice, and we know that it is the workmanship of God.
   No one doubts that Manichæus errs in saying that the soul is the
   essence of God. I now ask: When was that soul made, which is the work
   of God, which is distinguished by free will and reason, and is not of
   the essence of the Creator? Was it made at the same time that man was
   made out of the slime, and the breath of life was breathed into his
   face? Or, having previously existed, and having associated with
   reasonable and incorporeal creatures as well as lived, was it
   afterwards gifted with the inbreathing of God? Here you are silent;
   here you feign a rustic simplicity, and make scriptural words a cloak
   for unscriptural tenets. Where you affirm what no one wants to know,
   that the soul is not a part of God's own nature (as some impiously
   maintain), you ought rather to have declared (and this is what we all
   want to know) that it is not that which previously existed, which He
   had before created, which had long dwelt among rational, incorporeal,
   and invisible creatures. You say none of these things; you bring
   forward Manichæus, and keep Origen out of sight, and, just as when
   children ask for something to eat their nursemaids put them off with
   some little joke, so you direct the thoughts of us poor rustics to
   other matters, so that we may be taken up with the fresh character on
   the stage, and may not ask for what we want.

   22. But suppose the fact to be that you merely omit this, and that your
   simplicity does not mean something you are shrewd enough to conceal.
   Having once begun to speak of the soul, and to deduce arguments on such
   an important topic from man's first creation, why do you leave the
   discussion in mid-air, and suddenly pass to the angels, and the
   conditions under which the body of our Lord existed? Why do you pass by
   such a vast slough of difficulty, and leave us to stick in the mire? If
   the inbreathing of God (a view for which you have no liking, and a
   point which you now leave unsettled) is the creating of the human soul;
   whence had Eve her soul, seeing that God did not breathe into her face?
   But I will not dwell upon Eve, since she, as a type of the Church, was
   made out of one of her husband's ribs, and ought not, after so many
   ages, to be subjected to the calumnies of her descendants. I ask whence
   Cain and Abel, who were the firstborn of our first parents, had their
   souls? And the whole human race downwards, what, are we to think, was
   the origin of their souls? Did they come by propagation, like brute
   beasts? So that, as body springs from body, so soul from soul. Or is it
   the case that rational creatures, longing for bodily existence, sink by
   degrees to earth, and at last are tied even to human bodies? Surely (as
   the Church teaches in accordance with the Saviour's words, [5033] "My
   Father worketh hitherto and I work"; and the passage in Isaiah, [5034]
   "Who maketh the spirit of man in him"; and in the Psalms, [5035] "Who
   fashioneth one by one the hearts of them") God is daily making
   souls--He, with whom to will is to do, and who never ceases to be a
   Creator. I know what you are accustomed to say in opposition to this,
   and how you confront us with adultery and incest. But the dispute about
   these is a tedious one, and would exceed the narrow limits of the time
   at our disposal. The same argument may be retorted upon you, and
   whatever seems unworthy in the Creator of the present dispensation is
   again not unworthy, since it is His gift. Birth from adultery imputes
   no blame to the child, but to the father. As in the case of seeds, the
   earth which cherishes does not sin, nor the seed which is thrown into
   the furrows, nor the heat and moisture, under whose influence the grain
   bursts into bud, but some man, as for example, the thief and robber,
   who, by fraud and violence, plucks up the seed: so in the begetting of
   men, the womb, which corresponds to the earth, receives its own, and
   nourishes what it has received, and then gives a body to that which it
   nourishes, and divides into the several members the body it has formed.
   And among those secret recesses of the belly the hand of God is always
   working, and there is the same Creator of body and soul. Do not despise
   the goodness of your Maker, who fashioned you and made you as He chose.
   He Himself is the virtue of God and the wisdom of God, who, in the womb
   of the Virgin, built a house for Himself. Jephthah, who is reckoned by
   the Apostle among the saints, is the son of a harlot. But listen: Esau,
   born of Rebecca had Isaac, a "hairy man," both in mind and body, like
   good wheat, degenerates into darnel and wild oats; because the cause of
   vice and virtue does not lie in the seed, but in the will of him who is
   born. If it is an offence to be born with a human body, how is it that
   Isaac, Samson, John Baptist, are the children of promise? You see, I
   trust, what it is to have the courage of one's convictions. Suppose I
   am wrong, I openly say what I think. Do you, then, likewise either
   freely profess our opinions, or firmly maintain your own. Do not set
   yourself in my line of battle, so that, by feigning simplicity, you may
   be safe, and may be able, when you choose, to stab your opponent in the
   back. It is impossible for me, at the present moment, to write a book
   against the opinions of Origen. If Christ gives us life, we will devote
   another work to them. The point now is, whether the accused has
   answered the questions put to him, and whether his reply be clear and
   open.

   23. Let us pass from this to the most notorious point, that relating to
   the resurrection of the flesh and of the body; and here, my reader, I
   would admonish you that you may know I speak under a sense of fear and
   of the judgment of God, and that you ought so to hear. For, if the pure
   faith is to be found in his exposition, and there is no suspicion of
   unfaithfulness, I am not so foolish as to seek an occasion of accusing
   him, and while I wish to censure another for his fault be myself
   censured as a slanderer. I will ask you, therefore, to read what
   follows on the resurrection of the flesh; and, having read it, if it
   satisfies you (I know it is well calculated to please the ignorant),
   suspend your judgment, wait a while, refrain from expressing an opinion
   until I have finished my reply; and if after that it satisfies you,
   then you shall fix on us the brand of slander. "His passion also on the
   cross, His death and burial, which was the saving of the world, and His
   resurrection in a true and not an imaginary sense, we confess; and that
   [5036] being the firstborn from the dead, He conveyed to heaven the
   firstfruits of our bodily substance which, after being laid in the
   tomb, He raised to life, thus giving us the hope of resurrection in the
   resurrection of His own body; wherefore we all hope so to rise from the
   dead, as He rose again; not in any foreign and strange bodies, which
   are but phantom shapes assumed for the moment; but as He Himself rose
   again in that body which was laid in the holy sepulchre at our very
   doors, so we, in the very bodies with which we are now clothed, and in
   which we are now buried, hope to rise again for the same reason and by
   the same [5037] command. For the bodies which, as the Apostle says, are
   sown in corruption, shall rise in incorruption; being sown in
   dishonour, they shall rise in glory. [5038] It is sown an animal body,
   it shall rise a spiritual body'; and of them the Saviour said in his
   teaching: [5039] For they who shall be worthy of that world, and of the
   resurrection from the dead, shall neither marry nor be given in
   marriage, for they can die no more, but shall be as the angels of God,
   since they are the sons of the resurrection.'"

   24. Again, in another part of his letter, that is, towards the end of
   his own homilies, that he might cheat the ear of the ignorant, he makes
   a grand parade and noise about the Resurrection, but in ambiguous and
   balanced language. He says: "We have not omitted the second glorious
   advent of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall come in His own glory to
   judge the quick and the dead; for He shall awake all the dead, and
   cause them to stand before His own judgment-seat; and shall render to
   every one according to what he has done in the body, whether it be good
   or bad; for every one shall either be crowned in the body because he
   lived a pure and righteous life, or be condemned, because he was the
   slave alike of pleasure and iniquity." What we read in the Gospel, that
   at the end of the world, [5040] if it were possible, even the elect are
   to be seduced, we see verified in this passage. The ignorant crowd
   hears of the dead and buried, hears of the resurrection of the dead in
   a true and not an imaginary sense, hears that the firstfruits of our
   bodily substance in our Lord's body have reached the heavenly regions,
   hears that we shall rise again not in foreign and strange bodies, which
   are mere phantom shapes, but, as our Lord rose in the body which lay
   amongst us in the holy sepulchre, so we also in the very bodies with
   which we are now clothed and buried shall rise again in the day of
   judgment. And that no one might think this too little, he adds in the
   last section: "And He shall render to every one according to what he
   did in the body, whether it were good or bad: for every one shall
   either be crowned in the body for his pure and righteous life, or shall
   be condemned, because he was the slave of pleasure and iniquity."
   Hearing these things the ignorant crowd suspects no artifice, no snares
   in all this noise about the dead, the burial of the body, and the
   resurrection. It believes things are as they are said to be. For there
   is more devotion in the ears of the people than in the priest's heart.

   25. Again and again, my reader, I admonish you to be patient, and to
   learn what I also have learnt through patience; and yet, before I take
   the veil off the dragon's face, and briefly explain Origen's views
   respecting the resurrection (for you cannot know the efficacy of the
   antidote unless you see clearly what the poison is), I beg you to read
   his statements with caution, and to go over them again and again. Mark
   well that, though he nine times speaks of the resurrection of the body,
   he has not once introduced the resurrection of the flesh, and you may
   fairly suspect that he left it out on purpose. Well, Origen says in
   several places, and especially in his fourth book "Of the
   Resurrection," and in the "Exposition of the First Psalm," and in the
   "Miscellanies," that there is a double error common in the Church, in
   which both we and the heretics are implicated: "We, in our simplicity
   and fondness for the flesh, say that the same bones, and blood, and
   flesh, in a word, limbs and features, and the whole bodily structure,
   rise again at the last day: so that, forsooth, we shall walk with our
   feet, work with our hands, see with our eyes, hear with our ears, and
   carry about with us a belly never satisfied, and a stomach which
   digests our food. Consequently, believing this, we say that we must
   eat, drink, perform the offices of nature, marry wives, beget children.
   For what is the use of organs of generation, if there is to be no
   marriage? For what purpose are teeth, if the food is not to be
   masticated? What is the good of a belly and of meats, if, according to
   the Apostle, both it and they are to be destroyed? And the same Apostle
   again exclaims, [5041] Flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of
   God, nor shall corruption inherit incorruption.'" This, according to
   him, is what we in our rustic innocence maintain. But as for the
   heretics, amongst whom are Marcion, Apelles, Valentinus, Manes (a
   synonym for Mania), he says that they utterly deny the resurrection of
   the flesh and of the body, and allow salvation only to the soul, and
   hold that it is futile for us to say that we shall rise after the
   pattern of our Lord, since our Lord also Himself rose again in a
   phantom body, and not only His resurrection, but His very nativity was
   docetic or imaginary; that is, more apparent than real. Origen himself
   is dissatisfied with both opinions. He says that he shuns both errors,
   that of the flesh, which our party maintain, and that of the phantoms,
   maintained by the heretics, because both sides go to the opposite
   extremes, some wishing to be the same that they have been, others
   denying altogether the resurrection of the body. "There are four
   elements," he says, "known to philosophers and physicians: earth,
   water, air, and fire, and out of these all things and human bodies are
   compacted. We find earth in flesh, air in the breath, water in the
   moisture of the body, fire in its heat. When, then, the soul, at the
   command of God, lets go this perishing and feeble body, little by
   little all things return to their parent substances: flesh is again
   absorbed into the earth, the breath is mingled with the air, the
   moisture returns to the depths, the heat escapes to the ether. And as
   if you throw into the sea a pint of milk and wine, and wish again to
   separate what is mixed together, although the wine and milk which you
   threw in is not lost, and yet it is impossible to keep separate what
   was poured out; so the substance of flesh and blood does not perish,
   indeed, so far as concerns the original matter, yet they cannot again
   become the former structure, nor can they be altogether the same that
   they were." Observe that when such things are said, the firmness of the
   flesh, the fluidity of the blood, the density of the sinews, the
   interlacing of the veins, and the hardness of the bones is denied.

   26. "For another reason," he says, "we confess the resurrection of our
   bodies, those which have been laid in the grave and have turned to
   dust; Paul's body will be that of Paul, Peter's that of Peter, and each
   will have his own; for it is not right that souls should sin in one
   body and be tormented in another, nor is it worthy of the Righteous
   Judge that one body should shed its blood for Christ and another be
   crowned." Who, hearing this, would think he denied the resurrection of
   the flesh? "And," he says, "every seed has its own law of being
   inherent in it by the gift of God, the Creator, which law contains in
   embryonic form the future growth. The bulky tree, with its trunk,
   boughs, fruit, leaves, is not seen in the seed, but nevertheless exists
   in the seed by implication or, according to the Greek expression, by
   the spermatikos logos. [5042] There is within the grain of corn a
   marrow, or vein, which, when it has been dissolved in the earth,
   attracts to itself the surrounding materials, and rises again in the
   shape of stalk, leaves, and ear; and thus, while it is one thing when
   it dies, it is another thing when it rises from the dead; for in the
   grain of wheat, roots, stalk, leaves, ears, trunk are as yet
   unseparated. In the same manner, in human bodies, according to the law
   of their being, certain original principles remain which ensure their
   resurrection, and a sort of marrow, that is a seed-plot of the dead, is
   fostered in the bosom of the earth. But when the day of judgment shall
   have come, and at the voice of the archangel, and the sound of the last
   trumpet, the earth shall totter, immediately the seeds will be instinct
   with life, and in a moment of time will cause the dead to burst into
   life; yet the flesh which they will reconstitute will not be the same
   flesh, nor will it be in the old forms. To give you the assurance that
   we speak the truth, let me quote the words of the Apostle: [5043] But
   some one says, How shall the dead rise? and with what body will they
   come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body
   which shall be, but a bare grain, it may be of wheat, or the seed of a
   vine and a tree.' And as we have already made the grain of wheat, and
   to some extent the planting of trees, the subject of our reasoning, let
   us now take the grape-stone as an example. It is a mere granule, so
   small that you can scarcely hold it between your two fingers. Where are
   the roots? where the tortuous interlacing of roots, of trunk and
   off-shoots? where the shade of the leaves, and the lovely clusters
   teeming with coming wine? What you have in your fingers is parched and
   scarcely discernible; nevertheless, in that dry granule, by the power
   of God and the secret law of propagation, the foaming new wine must
   have its origin. You will allow all this in the case of a tree; will
   you not admit such things to be possible in the case of a man? The
   plant which perishes is thus decked with beauty; why should we think
   that man, who abides, will receive back his former meanness? Do you
   demand that there should be flesh, bones, blood, limbs, so that you
   must have the barber to cut your hair, that your nose may run, your
   nails must be trimmed, your lower parts may gender filth or minister to
   lust? If you introduce these foolish and gross notions, you forget what
   is told us of the flesh, namely, that in it we cannot please God, and
   that it is an enemy; you forget, also, what is told us of the
   resurrection of the dead: [5044] It is sown in corruption, it shall
   rise in incorruption. It is sown in dishonour, it shall rise in glory.
   It is sown in weakness, it shall rise in power. It is sown a natural
   body, it shall rise a spiritual body.' Now we see with our eyes, hear
   with our ears, act with our hands, walk with our feet. But in that
   spiritual body we shall be all sight, all hearing, all action, all
   movement. The Lord shall transfigure [5045] the body of our humiliation
   and fashion it according to His own glorious body. In saying
   transfigure he affirms identity with the members which we now have. But
   a different body, spiritual and ethereal, is promised to us, which is
   neither tangible, nor perceptible to the eye, nor ponderable; and the
   change it undergoes will be suitable to the difference in its future
   abode. Otherwise, if there is to be the same flesh and if our bodies
   are to be the same, there will again be males and females, there will
   again be marriage; men will have the shaggy eyebrow and the flowing
   beard; women will have their smooth cheeks and narrow chests, and their
   bodies must adapt themselves to conception and parturition. Even tiny
   infants will rise again; old men will also rise; the former to be
   nursed, the latter to be supported by the staff. And, simple ones, be
   not deceived by the resurrection of our Lord, because He showed His
   side and His hands, stood on the shore, went for a walk with Cleophas,
   and said that He had flesh and bones. That body, because it was not
   born of the seed of man and the pleasure of the flesh, has its peculiar
   prerogatives. He ate and drank after His resurrection, and appeared in
   clothing, and allowed Himself to be touched, that He might make His
   doubting Apostles believe in His resurrection. But still He does not
   fail to manifest the nature of an aërial and spiritual body. For He
   enters when the doors are shut, and in the breaking of bread vanishes
   out of sight. Does it follow then that after our resurrection we shall
   eat and drink, and perform the offices of nature? If so, what becomes
   of the promise, [5046] The mortal must put on immortality.'"

   27. Here we have the complete explanation of the fact that in your
   exposition of the faith, to deceive the ears of the ignorant, you nine
   times make mention of the body, and not even once of the flesh, and all
   the while men think that you confess the body of flesh, and that the
   flesh is identical with the body. If it is the same as the body, it
   means nothing different. I say this, for I know your answer: "I thought
   the body was the same as the flesh; I spoke with all simplicity." Why
   do you not rather call it flesh to signify the body, and speak
   indifferently at one time of the flesh, at another of the body, that
   the body may be shown to consist of flesh, and the flesh to be the
   body. But believe me, your silence is not the silence of simplicity.
   For flesh is defined one way, the body another; all flesh is body, but
   not every body is flesh. Flesh is properly what is comprised in blood,
   veins, bones, and sinews. Although the body is also called flesh, yet
   sometimes it is designated ethereal or aërial, because it is not
   subject to touch and sight; and yet it is frequently both visible and
   tangible. A wall is a body, but is not flesh; a stone is a body, but it
   is not said to be flesh. Wherefore the Apostle calls some bodies
   celestial, some terrestrial. A celestial body is that of the sun, moon,
   stars; a terrestrial body is that of fire, air, water, and the rest,
   which bodies being inanimate are known as consisting of material
   elements. You see we understand your subtleties, and publish abroad the
   mysteries which you utter in the bedchamber and amongst the perfect,
   mysteries which may not reach the ears of outsiders. You smile, and
   with hand uplifted and a snap of the fingers retort, [5047] "All the
   glory of the king's daughter is within." And, [5048] "The king led me
   into his bedchamber." It is clear why you spoke of the resurrection of
   the body and not of that of the flesh; of course it was that we in our
   ignorance might think that when body was spoken of flesh was meant;
   while yet the perfect would understand that, when body was spoken of,
   flesh was denied. Lastly, the Apostle, in his Epistle to the
   Colossians, wishing to show that the body of Christ was made of flesh,
   and was not spiritual, aërial, attenuated, said significantly, [5049]
   "And you, when you were some time alienated from Christ and enemies of
   His spirit in evil works, He has reconciled in the body of His flesh
   through death." And again in the same Epistle: [5050] "In whom ye were
   circumcised with a circumcision made without hands in the putting off
   of the body of the flesh." If by body is meant flesh only, and the word
   is not ambiguous, nor capable of diverse significations, it was quite
   superfluous to use both expressions--bodily and of flesh--as though
   body did not imply flesh.

   28. In the symbol of our faith and hope, which was delivered by the
   Apostles, and is not written with paper and ink, but on fleshy tables
   of the heart, after the confession of the Trinity and the unity of the
   Church, the whole symbol of Christian dogma concludes with the
   resurrection of the flesh. You dwell so exclusively upon the subject of
   the body, harping upon it in your discourse, repeating first the body,
   and secondly the body, and again the body, and nine times over the
   body, that you do not even once name the flesh; whereas they always
   speak of the flesh, but say nothing of the body. I would have you know
   that we see through what you craftily add, and with wise precaution
   seek to conceal. For you make use of the same passages to prove the
   reality of the resurrection by means of which Origen denies it; you
   support questionable positions with doubtful arguments, and thus raise
   a storm which in a moment overthrows the settled fabric of faith. You
   quote the words, [5051] "It is sown an animal body: it shall rise a
   spiritual body." "For they shall neither marry, nor be given in
   marriage, but shall be as the angels in heaven." What other instances
   would you take if you were denying the resurrection? You intend to
   confess the resurrection of the flesh, you say, in a real and not an
   imaginary sense. After the remarks with which you smooth things over to
   the ears of the ignorant, to the effect that we rise again with the
   very bodies with which we died and were buried, why do you not go on
   and speak thus: "The Lord after His resurrection showed the prints of
   the nails in His hands, pointed to the wound of the spear in His side,
   and when the Apostles doubted because they thought they saw a phantom,
   gave them reply, [5052] Handle Me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh
   and blood as ye see Me have'; and specially to Thomas, [5053] Put thy
   finger into My hands, and thy hand into My side, and be not faithless,
   but believing.' Similarly after the resurrection we shall have the same
   members which we now use, the same flesh and blood and bones, for it is
   not the nature of these which is condemned in Holy Scripture, but their
   works. Then again, it is written in Genesis: [5054] My Spirit shall not
   abide in those men, because they are flesh.' And the Apostle Paul,
   speaking of the corrupt doctrine and works of the Jews, says: [5055] I
   rested not in flesh and blood.' And to the Saints, who, of course, were
   in the flesh, he says: [5056] But ye are not in the flesh, but in the
   spirit, if the Spirit of God dwells in you.' For by denying that they
   were in the flesh who clearly were in the flesh, he condemned not the
   substance of the flesh but its sins."

   29. The true confession of the resurrection declares that the flesh
   will be glorious, but without destroying its reality. And when the
   Apostle says, [5057] "This is corruptible and mortal," his words denote
   this very body, that is to say, the flesh which was then seen. But when
   he adds that it puts on incorruption and immortality, he does not say
   that that which is put on, that is the clothing, does away with the
   body which it adorns in glory, but that it makes that body glorious,
   which before lacked glory; so that the more worthless robe of mortality
   and weakness being laid aside, we may be clothed with the gold of
   immortality, and, so to speak, with the blessedness of strength as well
   as virtue; since we wish not to be stripped of the flesh, but to put on
   over it the vesture of glory, and desire to be clothed upon with our
   house, which is from heaven, that mortality may be swallowed up by
   life. Certainly, no one is clothed upon who was not previously clothed.
   Accordingly, our Lord was not so transfigured on the mountain that He
   lost His hands and feet and other members, and suddenly began to roll
   along in a round shape like that of the sun or a ball; but the same
   members glowed with the brightness of the sun and blinded the eyes of
   the Apostles. Hence, also, His garments were changed, but so as to
   become white and glistening, not aërial, for I suppose you do not
   intend to maintain that His clothes also were spiritual. [5058] The
   Evangelist adds that His face shone like the sun; but when mention is
   made of His face, I reckon that His other members were beheld as well.
   Enoch was translated in the flesh; Elias was carried up to heaven in
   the flesh. They are not dead, they are inhabitants of Paradise, and
   even there retain the members with which they were rapt away and
   translated. What we aim at in fasting, they have through fellowship
   with God. They feed on heavenly bread, and are satisfied with every
   word of God, having Him as their food who is also their Lord. Listen to
   the Saviour saying: [5059] "And my flesh rests in hope." And elsewhere,
   [5060] "His flesh saw not corruption." And again, [5061] "All flesh
   shall see the salvation of God." And must you be for ever making the
   body a twofold thing? Rather quote the vision of [5062] Ezekiel, who
   joins bones to bones and brings them forth from their sepulchres, and
   then, making them to stand on their feet, binds them together with
   flesh and sinews, and clothes them with skin.

   30. Listen to those words of thunder which fall from Job, the
   vanquisher of torments, who, as he scrapes away the filth of his
   decaying flesh with a potsherd, solaces his miseries with the hope and
   the reality of the resurrection: [5063] "Oh, that," he says, "my words
   were written! Oh, that they were inscribed in a book with an iron pen,
   and on a sheet of lead, that they were graven in the rock for ever! For
   I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that in the last day I shall rise
   from the earth, and again be clothed with my skin, and in my flesh
   shall see God, Whom I shall see for myself, and my eyes shall behold,
   and not another. This my hope is laid up in my bosom." What can be
   clearer than this prophecy? No one since the days of Christ speaks so
   openly concerning the resurrection as he did before Christ. He wishes
   his words to last for ever; and that they might never be obliterated by
   age, he would have them inscribed on a sheet of lead, and graven on the
   rock. He hopes for a resurrection; nay, rather he knew and saw that
   Christ, his Redeemer, was alive, and at the last day would rise again
   from the earth. The Lord had not yet died, and the athlete of the
   Church saw his Redeemer rising from the grave. When he says, "And I
   shall again be clothed with my skin, and in my flesh see God," I
   suppose he does not speak as if he loved his flesh, for it was decaying
   and putrifying before his eyes; but in the confidence of rising again,
   and through the consolation of the future, he makes light of his
   present misery. Again he says: "I shall be clothed with my skin." What
   mention do we find here of an ethereal body? What of an aërial body,
   like to breath and wind? Where there is skin and flesh, where there are
   bones and sinews, and blood and veins, there assuredly is fleshy tissue
   and distinction of sex. "And in my flesh," he says, "I shall see God."
   When all flesh shall see the salvation of God, and Jesus as God, then
   I, also, shall see the Redeemer and Saviour, and my God. But I shall
   see him in that flesh which now tortures me, which now melts away for
   pain. Therefore, in my flesh shall I behold God, because by His own
   resurrection He has healed all my infirmities." Does it not seem to you
   that Job was then writing against Origen, and was holding a controversy
   similar to ours against the heretics, for the reality of the flesh in
   which he underwent tortures? For he could not bear to think that all
   his sufferings would be in vain; while the flesh he actually bore was
   tortured as flesh indeed, it would be some other and spiritual kind of
   flesh that would rise again. Wherefore he presses home and emphasizes
   the truth, and puts a stop to all that might lie hid in an artful
   confession, by speaking out plainly: "Whom I shall see for myself and
   my eyes shall behold and not another." If he is not to rise again in
   his own sex, if he is not to have the same members which were then
   lying on the dunghill, if he does not open the same eyes to see God
   with which he was then looking at the worms, where will Job then be?
   You do away with what constituted Job, and give me the hollow phrase,
   Job shall rise again; it is as if you were to order a ship to be
   restored after shipwreck, and then were to refuse each particular thing
   of which a ship is made.

   31. I will speak freely, and although you screw your mouths, pull your
   hair, stamp your feet, and take up stones like the Jews, I will openly
   confess the faith of the Church. The reality of a resurrection without
   flesh and bones, without blood and members, is unintelligible. Where
   there are flesh and bones, where there are blood and members, there
   must of necessity be diversity of sex. Where there is diversity of sex,
   there John is John, Mary is Mary. You need not fear the marriage of
   those who, even before death, lived in their own sex without
   discharging the functions of sex. When it is said, "In that day they
   shall neither marry, nor be given in marriage," the words refer to
   those who can marry, and yet will not do so. For no one says of the
   angels, "They shall not marry, nor be given in marriage." I never heard
   of a marriage being celebrated among the spiritual virtues in heaven:
   but where there is sex, there you have man and woman. Hence it is that,
   although you were reluctant, you were compelled by the truth to confess
   that, "A man must either be crowned in the body because he lived a pure
   and upright life, or be condemned in the body, because he was the slave
   of pleasure and iniquity." Substitute flesh for body, and you have not
   denied the existence of male and female. Who can have any glory from a
   life of chastity if we have no sex which would make unchastity
   possible? Who ever crowned a stone for continuing a virgin? Likeness to
   the angels is promised us, that is, the blessedness of their angelic
   existence without flesh and sex will be bestowed on us in our flesh and
   with our sex. I am simple enough so to believe, and so know how to
   confess that sex can exist without the functions of the senses; that it
   is thus that men rise, and that it is thus that they are made equal to
   the angels. Nor will the resurrection of the members all at once seem
   superfluous, because they are to have no office, since, while we are
   still in this life, we strive not to perform the works of the members.
   Moreover, likeness to the angels does not imply a changing of men into
   angels, but their growth in immortality and glory.

   32. But as for the arguments drawn from boys, and infants, and old men,
   and meats, and excrements, which you employ against the Church, they
   are not your own; they flow from a heathen source. For the heathen mock
   us with the same. You say you are a Christian; lay aside the weapons of
   the heathen. It is for them to learn from you to confess the
   resurrection of the dead, not for you to learn from them to deny it. Or
   if you belong to the enemy's camp, show yourself openly as an
   adversary, that you may share the wounds we inflict on the heathen. I
   will allow you your jest about the necessity of nursemaids to stop the
   infants from crying; of the decrepit old men, who, you fear, would be
   shrivelled with winter's cold. I will admit also that the barbers have
   learnt their craft for nothing, for do we not know that the people of
   Israel for forty years experienced no growth of either nails or hair;
   and, still more, their clothes were not worn out, nor did their shoes
   wax old? Enoch and Elias, concerning whom we spoke a while ago, abide
   all this time in the same state in which they were carried away. They
   have teeth, belly, organs of generation, and yet have no need of meats,
   or wives. Why do you slander the power of God, who can from that [5064]
   marrow and seed-plot of which you speak, not only produce flesh from
   flesh, but also make one body from another; and change water, that is
   worthless flesh, into the precious wine of an aërial body? the same
   power by which He created all things out of nothing can give back what
   has existed, because it is a much smaller thing to restore what has
   been, than to make what never was. Do you wonder that there is a
   resurrection from the condition of infancy and old age to that of
   mature manhood, seeing that a perfect man was made out of the slime of
   the earth without having gone through successive stages of growth? A
   rib is changed into a woman; and by the third mode of creating man, the
   poor elements of our birth which put us to the blush are changed into
   flesh, bound together by the members, run into veins, harden into
   bones. There is a fourth sort of human generation of which I can tell
   you. "The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the
   Highest shall overshadow thee. Wherefore that [5065] holy thing which
   shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God." Adam was created
   one way, Eve another, Abel another, the man Jesus Christ another. And
   yet, different as are all these beginnings, the nature of man remains
   one and the same.

   33. If I wished to prove the resurrection of the flesh and of all the
   members, and to give the meaning of the several passages, many books
   would be required; but the matter in hand does not call for this. For I
   purposed not to reply to Origen in every detail, but to disclose the
   mysteries of your insincere "Apology." I have, however, tarried long in
   maintaining the opposite to your position, and am afraid that, in my
   eagerness to expose fraud, I may leave a stumbling-block in the way of
   the reader. I will, therefore, mass together the evidence, and glance
   at the proofs in passing, so that we may bring all the weight of
   Scripture to bear upon your poisonous argument. He who has not a
   wedding garment, and has not kept that command, [5066] "Let your
   garments be always white," is bound hand and foot that he may not
   recline at the banquet, or sit on a throne, or stand at the right hand
   of God; [5067] he is sent to Gehenna, where there is weeping and
   gnashing of teeth. [5068] "The hairs of your head are numbered." If the
   hairs, I suppose the teeth would be more easily numbered. But there is
   no object in numbering them if they are some day to perish. [5069] "The
   hour will come in which all who are in the tombs shall hear the voice
   of the Son of God, and shall come forth." They shall hear with ears,
   come forth with feet. This Lazarus had already done. They shall,
   moreover, come forth from the tombs; that is, they who had been laid in
   the tombs, the dead, shall come, and shall rise again from their
   graves. For the dew which God gives is [5070] healing to their bones.
   Then shall be fulfilled what God says by the prophet, [5071] "Go, my
   people, into thy closets for a little while, until mine anger pass."
   The closets signify the graves, out of which that, of course, is
   brought forth which had been laid therein. And they shall come out of
   the graves like young mules free from the halter. Their heart shall
   rejoice, and their bones shall rise like the sun; all flesh shall come
   into the presence of the Lord, and He shall command the fishes of the
   sea; and they shall give up the bones which they had eaten; and He
   shall bring joint to joint, and bone to bone; and [5072] they who slept
   in the dust of the earth shall arise, some to life eternal, others to
   shame and everlasting confusion. Then shall the just see the punishment
   and tortures of the wicked, for [5073] their worm shall not die, and
   their fire shall not be extinguished, and they shall be beheld by all
   flesh. As many of us, therefore, as have this hope, as we have yielded
   our members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity, so
   let us yield them servants to righteousness unto holiness, that [5074]
   we may rise from the dead and walk in newness of life. As also the life
   of the Lord Jesus is manifested in our mortal body, so [5075] also He
   who raised up Jesus Christ from the dead shall quicken our mortal
   bodies on account of His Spirit Who dwelleth in us. For it is right
   that as we have always borne about the putting to death of Christ in
   our body, so the life, also, of Jesus, should be manifested in our
   mortal body, that is, in our flesh, which is mortal according to
   nature, but eternal according to grace. Stephen also [5076] saw Jesus
   standing on the right hand of the Father, and the [5077] hand of Moses
   became snowy white, and was afterwards restored to its original colour.
   There was still a hand, though the two states were different. The
   potter in [5078] Jeremiah, whose vessel, which he had made, was broken
   through the roughness of the stone, restored from the same lump and
   from the same clay that which had fallen to pieces; and, if we look at
   the word resurrection itself, it does not mean that one thing is
   destroyed, another raised up; and the addition of the word dead, points
   to our own flesh, for that which in man dies, that is also brought to
   life. [5079] The wounded man on the road to Jericho is taken to the inn
   with all his limbs complete, and the stripes of his offences are healed
   with immortality.

   34. Even the graves were opened [5080] at our Lord's passion when the
   sun fled, the earth trembled, and many of the bodies of the saints
   arose, and were seen in the holy city. [5081] "Who is this," says
   Isaiah, "that cometh up from Edom, with shining raiment from Bozrah, so
   beautiful in his glistening robe?" Edom is by interpretation either
   earthy or bloody; Bosor either flesh, or in tribulation. In few words
   he shows the whole mystery of the resurrection, that is, both the
   reality of the flesh and the growth in glory. And the meaning is: Who
   is he that cometh up from the earth, cometh up from blood? According to
   the [5082] prophecy of Jacob, He has bound His foal to the vine, and
   has trodden the wine-press alone, and His garments are red with new
   wine from Bosor, that is from flesh, or from the tribulation of the
   world: for He Himself [5083] has conquered the world. And, therefore,
   His garments are red and shining, because He is [5084] beauteous in
   form more than the sons of men, and on account of the glory of His
   triumph they have been changed into a white robe; and then, in truth,
   as concerns Christ's flesh, were fulfilled the words, [5085] "Who is
   this that cometh up all in white, leaning upon her beloved?" And that
   which is written in the same book: [5086] "My beloved is white and
   ruddy." These men are his true followers who have not [5087] defiled
   their garments with women, for they have continued virgins, who have
   made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. And so they
   shall be in white clothing. Then shall the saying of our Lord appear
   perfectly realised: [5088] "All that my Father has given me, I shall
   not lose aught thereof, but I will raise it up again at the last day;"
   the whole of His humanity, forsooth, which He had taken upon Him in its
   entirety at His birth. Then shall the sheep which was [5089] lost, and
   was wandering in the lower world, be carried whole on the Saviour's
   shoulders, and the sheep which was sick with sin shall be supported by
   the mercy of the Judge. Then shall they see him who pierced Him, who
   shouted, [5090] "Crucify Him, crucify Him." Again and again shall they
   beat their breasts, they and their women, those women to whom our Lord
   said, as He carried His cross, [5091] "Ye daughters of Jerusalem, weep
   not for me but weep for yourselves, and for your children." Then shall
   be fulfilled the prophecy of the angels, who said to the stupefied
   Apostles, [5092] "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye looking with
   astonishment into heaven? This Jesus who is taken from you into heaven,
   shall come in like manner as ye have seen Him go into heaven." But what
   are we to think of a man saying that our Lord [5093] ate with the
   Apostles for forty days after His resurrection in order that they might
   not think Him to be a phantom, and then asserting that it was a phantom
   which did this very thing, which ate and which was seen by many in the
   flesh. That which was seen is either real, or false. If it is real, it
   follows that He really ate, and really had members. But if it is false,
   how could He be willing to give false impressions in order to prove the
   truth of His resurrection? For no one proves what is true by means of
   what is false. You will say, are we then going to eat after our
   resurrection? I know not. Scripture does not tell us; and yet, if the
   question be asked, I do not think we shall eat. For I have read that
   the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, while it promises [5094] such
   things as eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the
   heart of man. Moses fasted forty days and forty nights. Human nature
   does not allow of this, but what is impossible with men is not
   impossible with God. Just as, in foretelling the future, it matters not
   whether a person announces what will take place after ten years or
   after a hundred, since the knowledge of futurity is all one; so he who
   can fast for forty days and yet live,--not, indeed, that he can of
   himself fast, but that he lives by the power of God,--will also be able
   to live for ever without food and drink. Why did our Lord eat an
   honeycomb? To prove the resurrection: not to give your palate the
   pleasure of tasting of honey. He asked for a fish broiled on the coals
   that He might [5095] confirm the doubting Apostles, who did not dare
   approach Him because they thought they saw not a body, but a spirit.
   [5096] The daughter of the ruler of the synagogue was raised to life
   and took food. [5097] Lazarus, who had been four days dead, rose again,
   and comes before us at a dinner; not because he was accustomed to eat
   in the lower world, but because a case which presented such
   difficulties challenged the believer's criticism. As He showed them
   real hands and a real side, so He really ate with His disciples; really
   walked with Cleophas; conversed with men with a real tongue; really
   reclined at supper; with real hands took bread, blessed and brake it,
   and was offering it to them. And as for His suddenly vanishing out of
   their sight, that is the power of God, not of a shadowy phantom.
   Besides, even before His resurrection, when they had led Him out from
   Nazareth that they might cast Him down headlong from the brow of the
   hill, He passed through the midst of them, that is, escaped out of
   their hands. Can we follow Marcion, and say that because, when He was
   held fast, He escaped in a manner contrary to nature, therefore His
   birth must have been only apparent? Has not the Lord a privilege which
   is conceded to magicians? It is related of Apollonius of Tyana that,
   when standing in court before Domitian, he all at once disappeared. Do
   not put the power of the Lord on a level with the tricks of magicians,
   so that He may appear to have been what He was not, and may be thought
   to have eaten without teeth, walked without feet, broken bread without
   hands, spoken without a tongue, and showed a side which had no ribs.

   35. And how was it, you will say, that they did not recognize Him on
   the road if He had the same body which He had before? Let me recall
   what Scripture says: [5098] "Their eyes were holden, that they might
   not know Him." And again, "Their eyes were opened, and they knew Him."
   Was He one person when He was not known, and another when He was known?
   He was surely one and the same. Whether, therefore, they knew Him, or
   not, depended on their sight; it did not depend upon Him Who was seen;
   and yet it did depend on Him in this sense, that He held their eyes
   that they might not know Him. Lastly, that you may see that the mistake
   which held them was not to be attributed to the Lord's body, but to the
   fact that their eyes were closed, we are told: [5099] "Their eyes were
   opened, and they knew Him." Wherefore, also, Mary Magdalene so long as
   she did not recognize Jesus, and sought the living among the dead,
   thought He was the gardener. Afterwards she recognized Him and then she
   called Him Lord. After His resurrection Jesus was standing on the
   shore, His disciples were in the ship. When the others did not know
   Him, the disciple whom Jesus loved [5100] said to Peter, "It is the
   Lord." For virginity is the first to recognize a virgin body. He was
   the same, yet was not seen alike by all as the same. And immediately it
   is added, [5101] "And no one durst ask Him, Who art Thou? for they knew
   that He was the Lord." No one durst, because they knew that He was God.
   They ate with Him at dinner because they saw He was a man and had
   flesh; not that He was one person as God, another as man: but, being
   one and the same Son of God, He was known as man, adored as God. I
   suppose I must now air my philosophy, and say that our senses are not
   to be relied on, and especially sight. A [5102] Carneades must be
   awaked from the dead to tell us the truth--that an oar seems broken in
   the water, porticos afar off look more magnificent, the angles of
   towers seem rounded in the distance, that the backs of pigeons change
   their colours with every movement. When Rhoda [5103] announced Peter,
   and told the Apostles, they did not believe that he had escaped, on
   account of the greatness of the danger, but suspected it was a phantom.
   Moreover, in passing through closed doors, He exhibited the same power
   as in vanishing out of sight. [5104] Lynceus, as fable relates, used to
   see through a wall. Could not the Lord enter when the doors were shut,
   unless He were a phantom? Eagles and vultures perceive dead bodies
   across the sea. Shall not the Saviour see His Apostles without opening
   the door? Tell me, sharpest of disputants, which is greater, to hang
   the vast weight of the earth on nothing, and to balance it on the
   changing surface of the waves; or that God should pass through a closed
   door, and the creature yield to the Creator? You allow the greater; you
   object to the less. Peter [5105] walked upon the waters with his heavy
   and solid body. The soft water does not yield: his faith doubts a
   little, and immediately his body understands its own nature; that we
   may know that it was not his body that walked on the water, but his
   faith.

   36. I pray you, who use such elaborate arguments against the
   resurrection, let us have some simple talk together. Do you believe
   that our Lord really rose again in the same body in which He died and
   was buried, or do you not believe it? If you believe it, why do you
   make propositions which lead to the denial of the resurrection? If you
   do not believe, you who thus try to deceive the minds of the ignorant,
   and parade the word resurrection, though you mean nothing by it, listen
   to me. Not long ago, a certain disciple of Marcion said: "Woe to him
   who rises again with this flesh and these bones!" Our heart at once
   with joy replied, [5106] "We are buried together, and we shall rise
   together with Christ through baptism." "Do you speak of the
   resurrection of the soul, or of the flesh?" I answered, "Not that of
   the soul alone, but that of the flesh, which, together with the soul,
   is born again in the laver. And how shall that perish which has been
   born again in Christ?" "Because it is written," said he, [5107] "Flesh
   and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God.'" "I intreat you to
   mind what is said--Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of
   God.'" "It is said that they shall not rise again." "Not at all, but
   only they shall not inherit the kingdom.'" "How so?" "Because,' it
   follows, [5108] neither shall corruption inherit incorruption.' So long
   then as they remain mere flesh and blood, they shall not inherit the
   kingdom of God. But when the [5109] corruptible shall have put on
   incorruption, and the mortal shall have put on immortality, and the
   clay of the flesh shall have been made into a vessel, then that flesh
   which was formerly kept down by a heavy weight upon the earth, when
   once it has received the wings of the spirit--wings which imply its
   change, not its destruction--shall fly with fresh glory to heaven; and
   then shall be fulfilled that which is written, [5110] Death is
   swallowed up in victory. Where, O death, is thy boasting? O death,
   where is thy sting?'"

   37. Reversing the order, we have given our answer respecting the state
   of souls and the resurrection of the flesh; and, leaving out the
   opening portions of the letter, we have confined ourselves to the
   refutation of this most remarkable treatise. For we preferred to speak
   of the things of God rather than of our own wrongs. [5111] "If one man
   sin against another, they shall pray for him to the Lord. But if he sin
   against God, who shall pray for him?" In these days, on the contrary,
   we make it our first business to pursue with undying hate those who
   have injured us--to those who blaspheme God we indulgently hold out the
   hand. John writes to Bishop Theophilus an apology, of which the
   introduction runs thus: "You, indeed, as a man of God, adorned with
   apostolic grace, have upon you the care of all the Churches, especially
   of that which is at Jerusalem, though you yourself are distracted with
   countless anxieties for the Church of God, which is under you." This is
   barefaced adulation, and an attempt to concentrate [5112] authority in
   the hands of an individual. You, who ask for ecclesiastical rules, and
   make use of the [5113] canons of the Council of Nicæa, and claim
   authority over clerics who belong to another diocese and are [5114]
   actually living with their own bishop, answer my question, What has
   Palestine to do with the bishop of Alexandria? Unless I am deceived, it
   is decreed in those canons that Cæsarea is the metropolis of Palestine,
   and Antioch of the whole of the East. You ought therefore either to
   appeal to the bishop of Cæsarea, with whom you know that we have
   communion while we disdain to communicate with you, or, if judgment
   were to be sought at a distance, letters ought rather to be addressed
   to Antioch. But I know why you were unwilling to send to Cæsarea, or to
   Antioch. You knew what to flee from, what to avoid. You preferred to
   assail with your complaints ears that were preoccupied rather than pay
   due honour to your metropolitan. And I do not say this because I have
   anything to blame in the mission itself, except certain partialities
   which beget suspicion, but because you ought rather to clear yourself
   in the actual presence of your questioners. You begin with the words,
   "You have sent a most devoted servant of God, the presbyter Isidore, a
   man of influence no less from the dignity of his very gait and dress
   than from that of his divine understanding, to heal those whose souls
   are grievously sick; would that they had any sense of their illness! A
   man of God sends a man of God." No difference is made between a priest
   and a bishop; the same dignity belongs to the sender and the sent; this
   is lame enough; the ship, as the saying goes, is wrecked in harbour.
   That Isidore, whom you extol to the sky by your praises, lies under the
   same imputation of heresy [5115] at Alexandria as you at Jerusalem;
   wherefore he appears to have come to you not as an envoy, but as a
   confederate. Besides, the letters in his own handwriting, which, three
   months before the sending of the embassy, had been sent to us [5116]
   through an error in the address, were delivered to the presbyter
   Vincentius, and to this day they are in his keeping. In these letters
   the writer encourages the leader of his army [5117] to plant his foot
   firmly upon the rock of the faith, and not to be terrified by our
   Jeremiads. He promises, before we had any suspicion of his mission,
   that he will come to Jerusalem, and that on his arrival the ranks of
   his adversaries will be instantly crushed. And amongst the rest he uses
   these words: "As smoke vanishes in the air, and wax melts beside the
   fire, so shall they be scattered who are for ever resisting the faith
   of the Church, and are now through simple men endeavouring to disturb
   that faith."

   38. I ask you, my reader, what does a man, who writes these things
   before he comes, appear to you to be? An adversary, or an envoy? This
   is the man whom we may, indeed, call most pious, or most religious,
   and, to give the exact equivalent of the word, one devoted to the
   worship of God. This is the man of divine understanding, so
   influential, and of such dignity in gait and dress, that, like a
   spiritual Hippocrates, he is able by his presence to relieve the
   sickness of our souls, provided, however, we are willing to submit to
   his treatment. If such is his medicine, let him heal himself, since he
   is accustomed to heal others. To us, that divine understanding of his
   is folly for the sake of Christ. We willingly remain in the sickness of
   our simplicity, rather than, by using your eye-salve, learn an impious
   abuse of sight. Next come the words: "The excellent intentions of your
   Holiness compel our prayers to the Lord night and day; and, as though
   those intentions were already perfectly realised, we offer our prayers
   to Him in the holy places, that He may give you a perfect reward, and
   bestow on you the crown of life." You do right in giving thanks; for,
   if Isidore had not come you would not now have found in the whole of
   Palestine such a faithful associate. If he had not brought you the aid
   he had promised beforehand, you would find yourself surrounded by a
   crowd of rustics incapable of understanding your wisdom. This very
   apology of which we are now speaking was dictated in the presence and,
   to a great extent, with the assistance of Isidore, so that the same
   person both composed the letter and carried it to its destination.

   39. Your letter goes on to relate that "though he had come hither and
   had had three separate interviews with us, and had applied to the
   matter the healing language no less of your divine wisdom than of his
   own understanding, he found that he could be of no use to any one, nor
   could any one be of use to him." The fact is that he who is said to
   have had "three separate interviews with us," so that in his coming he
   might maintain the mystic number, and who talked to us about the
   command issued by Bishop Theophilus, did not choose to deliver the
   letters sent to us by him. And when we said: If you are an envoy,
   produce your credentials; if you have no letters, how can you prove to
   us that you are an envoy? he replied that he had, indeed, letters to us
   but he had been adjured by the bishop of Jerusalem not to give them to
   us. You see here the true envoy consistent with his proper character;
   you see how impartial he shows himself to both sides, that he may make
   peace, and exclude the suspicion of favouring either party. At all
   events, he had come without a plaster, and had not the physician's
   instruments at his command, and therefore his medicine was of no avail.
   "Jerome and those associated with him," you continue, "both secretly,
   and in the presence of all, again and again and with the attestation of
   an oath, satisfied him that they never had any doubts of our orthodoxy,
   saying: We have now just the same feeling toward him, as regards
   matters of faith, that we had when we used to communicate with him."
   See what dogmatic agreement can do. Isidore, in order that he might
   make such a report as this, is taken into close fellowship, and is
   spoken of as a man of God, and a most devout priest, a man of
   influence, of holy and venerable gait, and of divine understanding, the
   Hippocrates of the Christians. I, a poor wretch, hiding away in
   solitude, suddenly cut off by this mighty pontiff, have lost the name
   of priest. This "Jerome," then, with his ragged herd and shabby
   following, did he dare to give any answer to Isidore and his
   thunderbolts? Of course not; and doubtless for no other motive than
   fear that the envoy would never yield, and might overwhelm them by his
   presence and [5118] gigantic stature. "Not once, nor thrice, but again
   and again [5119] they swore that they knew the individual in question
   to be orthodox, and that they had never suspected him of heresy." What
   undisguised and shameless lying! A witness borne by a man to himself!
   Such witness as is not believed even in the mouth of a Cato, for [5120]
   in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established.
   Was there ever a word said, or a message sent to you, to the effect
   that, without being satisfied as to your orthodoxy, we would endure
   communion with you? When, through the instrumentality of the Count
   Archelaus, a most accomplished as well as a most Christian man, who
   tried to negotiate a peace between us, a place had been appointed where
   we were to meet, was not one of the first things postulated that the
   faith should form the basis of future agreement? He promised to come.
   Easter was approaching; a great multitude of monks had assembled; you
   were expected at the appointed place; what to do you did not know. All
   at once you sent word that some one or other was sick, you could not
   come that day. Is it a stage-player or a bishop who thus speaks?
   Suppose what you said was true, to suit the pleasure of one feeble
   woman who fears that she may have a headache, or may feel sick, or
   haste a pain in the stomach, while you are away, do you neglect the
   interests of the Church? Do you despise so many men, Christians and
   monks assembled together? We were unwilling to give occasion for
   breaking off the negotiation; we saw through the artifice of your
   procrastination, and sought to overcome the wrong you did us by
   patience. Archelaus wrote again, advising him that he was staying on
   for two days, in case he should be willing to come. But he was busy;
   his dear little woman had not ceased to vomit, he could not bestow a
   thought upon us until she should have escaped from her nausea. Well,
   after two months, at last the long-looked for Isidore arrived, and what
   he heard from us was not as you pretend, a testimony in your behalf,
   but the reason why we demanded satisfaction. For when he raised the
   point, "Why, if he were a heretic, did you communicate with him?" he
   was answered by us all that we communicated without any suspicion of
   his heresy; but that, after he had been summoned by the Most Reverend
   Epiphanius, both by word and by letter, and had disdained to answer,
   documents were addressed to the monks by Epiphanius himself, to the
   effect that, unless he gave satisfaction respecting the faith, no one
   should rashly communicate with him. The letters are in our hands; there
   can be no doubt about the matter. This, then, was the reply made by the
   whole body of the brethren: not, as you maintain, that you were not an
   heretic, because at a former time you were not said to be one. For upon
   that showing, a man must be said not to be sick, because previous to
   his sickness he was in good health.

   40. To proceed with the letter. "But when the ordination of
   Paulinianus, and the others associated with him, was brought forward,
   they began to feel that they themselves were in the wrong. For the sake
   of charity and concord every concession was made to them, and the only
   point insisted on was that, though they had been ordained contrary to
   the rules, yet they should be subject to the authority of the Church of
   God, that they should not rend it, and set up an authority of their
   own. But they, not agreeing to this, began to raise questions
   concerning the faith; and thus they made it evident to all that if the
   presbyter Jerome and his friends were not accused, they had no charge
   to bring against us, but that they only betook themselves to doctrinal
   questions because, when charges of error and misconduct were brought
   against them, they were utterly unable to reply to us on matters of
   that sort, or to give any satisfactory explanation of their
   wrong-doing: not that they had any hope that we could be convicted of
   heresy, but they were striving to injure our reputation."

   41. No one must blame the translator for this verbiage: the Greek is
   the same. Meanwhile I rejoice that whereas I thought I was beheaded I
   find my presbyterial head on my shoulders again. He says that we are
   utterly incapable of conviction, and he draws back from the encounter.
   If the cause of discord is not due to discussions about the faith, but
   springs from the ordination of Paulinianus, is it not the extreme of
   folly to give occasion to those who seek occasion by refusing to
   answer? Confess the faith; but do it so as to answer the question put
   to you, that it may be clear to all that the dispute is not one of
   faith, but of order. For so long as you are silent when questioned
   concerning the faith, your adversary has a right to say to you: "The
   matter is not one of order but of faith." If it is a question of order,
   you act foolishly in saying nothing when questioned concerning the
   faith. If it is one of faith, it is foolish of you to make a pretext of
   the question of order. Moreover, when you say your aim was that they
   might be subject to the Church, that they might not rend it, nor set up
   an authority of their own; who they are of whom you speak I do not well
   understand. If you are speaking of me and the presbyter Vincentius, you
   have been asleep long enough, if you only wake up now, after thirteen
   years, [5121] to say these things. For the reason why I forsook Antioch
   and he Constantinople, [5122] both famous cities, was, not that we
   might praise your popular eloquence, but that, in the country and in
   solitude, we might weep over the sins of our youth, and draw down upon
   us the mercy of Christ. But if Paulinianus is the subject of your
   remarks, he, as you see, is subject to his [5123] bishop, and lives at
   Cyprus: he sometimes comes to visit us, not as one of your clergy, but
   as another's, his, namely, by whom he was ordained. But if he wished
   even to stay here, and to live a quiet, solitary life sharing our
   exile, what does he owe you except the respect which we owe to all
   bishops? Suppose that he had been ordained by you; he would only tell
   you the same that I, a poor wretch of a man, told Bishop Paulinus of
   blessed memory. "Did I ask to be ordained by you?" I said. "If in
   bestowing the rank of presbyter you do not strip us of the monastic
   state, you can bestow or withhold ordination as you think best. But if
   your intention in giving the name presbyter was to take from me that
   for which I forsook the world, I must still claim to be what I always
   was; you have suffered no loss by ordaining me." [5124]

   42. "That they might not rend the Church," he says, "and set up an
   authority of their own." Who rends the Church? Do we, who as a complete
   household at Bethlehem communicate in the Church? Or is it you, who
   either being orthodox refuse through pride to speak concerning the
   faith, or else being heterodox are the real render of the Church? Do we
   rend the Church, who, a few months ago, about the day of Pentecost,
   when the sun was darkened and all the world dreaded the immediate
   coming of the Judge, presented forty candidates of different ages and
   sexes to your presbyter for baptism? There were certainly five
   presbyters in the monastery who had the right to baptize; but they were
   unwilling to do anything to move you to anger, for fear you might make
   this a pretext for reticence concerning the faith. Is it not you, on
   the contrary, who rend the Church, you who commanded your presbyters at
   Bethlehem not to give baptism to our candidates at Easter, so that we
   sent them to [5125] Diospolis to the Confessor and Bishop Dionysius for
   baptism? Are we said to rend the Church, who, outside our cells, hold
   no position in the Church? Or do not you rather rend the Church, who
   issue an order to your clergy that if any one says Paulinianus was
   consecrated presbyter by Epiphanius, he is to be forbidden to enter the
   Church. Ever since that time to this day we can only look from without
   on the cave of the Saviour, and, while heretics enter, we stand afar
   off and sigh.

   43. Are we schismatics? Is not he the schismatic who refuses a
   habitation to the living, a grave to the dead, and demands the exile of
   his brethren? Who was it that set at our throats, with special fury,
   that wild beast who constantly menaced the throats of the whole world?
   [5126] Who is it that permits the rain to beat upon the bones of the
   saints, and their harmless ashes, up to the present hour? These are the
   endearments with which the good shepherd invites us to reconciliation,
   and at the same time accuses us of setting up an authority of our
   own--us who are united in communion and charity with all the bishops,
   so long, at least, as they are orthodox. Do you yourself constitute the
   Church, and is whosoever offends you shut out from Christ? If we defend
   our own authority--prove that we have a bishop in your diocese. The
   reason that we have not had communion with you is the question of
   faith; answer our questions, and it will become one of order.

   44. "They," you go on, "also take advantage of other letters which they
   say Epiphanius wrote to them. But he, too shall give account for all
   his doings before the judgment seat of Christ, where great and small
   shall be judged without respect of persons. Still, how can they rely on
   his letter which he wrote only because we took him to task on the
   matter of the unlawful ordination of Paulinianus and his associates; as
   in the opening of that very letter he intimates?" What, I ask, is the
   meaning of this blindness? how is it that he is immersed, as the saying
   goes, in Cimmerian darkness? He says that we make a pretext, and that
   we have no letters from Epiphanius against him, and he immediately
   adds, "How can they rely on his letter, which he only wrote because he
   was taken to task by us, in the matter of the unlawful ordination of
   Paulinianus and his associates; as in the opening of that very letter
   he intimates?" We have no such letter! And what letter then is that,
   which in its opening sentence speaks of Paulinianus? There is something
   in the body of the letter of which you are afraid to make mention.
   Well! He was taken to task, you say, by you because of the age of
   Paulinianus. But you yourself ordain a man presbyter, and send him out
   as an envoy and a colleague. You have the boldness falsely to call
   Paulinianus a boy, and then to send out your own boy presbyter. You
   likewise take Theoseca, a deacon of the church of Thiria, and make him
   presbyter, and put weapons into his hands against us, and make a misuse
   of his eloquence for our injury. You alone are at liberty to trample on
   the rights of the Church; whatever you do, is the standard of teaching;
   and you do not blush to challenge Epiphanius to stand with you before
   the judgment seat of Christ. The sequel of this passage is to the
   following effect: [5127] he throws it in the teeth of Epiphanius that
   he was the partner of his table and an inmate of his house, and
   declares that they never had any talk together concerning the views of
   Origen, and he supports what he says with the attestation of an oath,
   saying: "He never showed, as God is witness, that he had even the
   suspicion that our faith was not correct?" I am unwilling to answer and
   argue acrimoniously, lest I seem to be convicting a bishop of perjury.
   There are several letters of Epiphanius in our possession. One to John
   himself, others to the bishops of Palestine, and one of recent date to
   the pontiff of Rome; and in these he speaks of himself as impugning his
   views in the presence of many, and says that he was not thought worthy
   of a reply, "and the whole Monastery," he says, "is witness to what we
   in our insignificance assert."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4986] Rom. viii. 26.

   [4987] Novatus the Carthaginian was the chief ally of Novatian, who,
   about the middle of the third century, founded the sect of the Cathari,
   or pure. The allusion is to the severity with which they treated the
   lapsed.

   [4988] Maximilla and Priscilla, who forsook their husbands and followed
   him, professing to be inspired prophetesses. Circ. a.d. 150. Montanus,
   like Novatian, refused to re-admit the lapsed.

   [4989] That is, John.

   [4990] 2 Cor. iii. 18.

   [4991] In Jerome's text, "limped in both its feet." It seemed better to
   give the accepted meaning.

   [4992] 1 Kings xviii. 21.

   [4993] Ps. xviii. 45.

   [4994] Prov. x. 9.

   [4995] That is, Epiphanius. See Jerome, Letter LI. c. 6. Epiphanius
   prays that God would free John and Rufinus and all their flock from all
   heresies.

   [4996] The doctrine that the Son is of "one substance with the Father."
   More correctly of one essence, etc.

   [4997] The meaning is that, where error is widespread, the Church
   authorities are forced to wink at speciously expressed error in the
   pastors.

   [4998] 1 Pet. iii. 15.

   [4999] John complained of the ordination of Paulinianus, Jerome's
   brother, to the priesthood by Epiphanius, for the monastery of
   Bethlehem.

   [5000] Matt. vi. 23.

   [5001] Origen's great speculative work "On First Principles."

   [5002] Ps. cxix. 67.

   [5003] Ps. cxvi. 7.

   [5004] Ps. cxlii. 7.

   [5005] Acts ii. 40.

   [5006] Vettius Agorius Prætextatus, one of the most virtuous of the
   heathen. Jerome writes of him to Marcella (Letter XXIII. 2): "I wish
   you to know that the consul designate is now in Tartarus."

   [5007] Gal. i. 8.

   [5008] Ps. cxxxix. 21, 22.

   [5009] Deut. xxxiii. 9.

   [5010] Matt. x. 37.

   [5011] Ps. viii. 3.

   [5012] 1 Cor. xiii. 9.

   [5013] Eunomius held that the Son "resembles the Father in nothing but
   his working," and similar doctrines.

   [5014] Of Sebaste, in the Lesser Armenia. Epiphanius described him as
   an Arian. He asserted that Bishops and Presbyters were equal.

   [5015] This probably relates to Rufinus, whose name was mentioned by
   Epiphanius in his letter to John.

   [5016] Col. i. 26.

   [5017] Rom. xi. 33.

   [5018] Is. liii. 8.

   [5019] Paulinianus.

   [5020] Acts xxiii. 5; Ex. xxii. 28.

   [5021] A celebrated orator of Athens, many of whose orations are
   extant. B. 458, d. 378 b.c.

   [5022] This story is from the 4th Declamation of Seneca.

   [5023] Literally "devours his wrongs."

   [5024] Ps. xxxiii. 6.

   [5025] Ps. civ. 4.

   [5026] Jude 6.

   [5027] Eph. i. 21.

   [5028] Rom. vii. 24.

   [5029] The names of the officers of the Roman Legion (some of them of
   doubtful meaning), viz., tribunes, primicerius, senator, ducenarius,
   centenarius, biarchus, circitor, eques, have been rendered
   approximately by these English equivalents.

   [5030] That is, apparently, with a play upon the word, Men of Mud.

   [5031] 1 Cor. ii. 14.

   [5032] 1 Cor. i. 25.

   [5033] John v. 17.

   [5034] That is, Zechariah xii. 1.

   [5035] Ps. xxxiii. 15.

   [5036] Col. i. 18.

   [5037] Jussione. Another reading, "Eâdem ratione et visione," might be
   rendered, "In the same condition and the same appearance."

   [5038] 1 Cor. xv. 44.

   [5039] Luke xx. 35, 36.

   [5040] Matt. xxiv. 24.

   [5041] 1 Cor. xv. 58.

   [5042] That is, the reason of the seed.

   [5043] 1 Cor. xv. 35, 37.

   [5044] 1 Cor. xv. 42, 44.

   [5045] Phil. iii. 21.

   [5046] 1 Cor. xv. 53.

   [5047] Ps. xlv. 13.

   [5048] Cant. i. 4.

   [5049] Col. i. 21, 22.

   [5050] Col. ii. 11.

   [5051] 1 Cor. xv. 44; Matt. xxii. 30; Luke xx. 35.

   [5052] Luke xxiv. 39.

   [5053] John xx. 27.

   [5054] Gen. vi. 3.

   [5055] Gal. i. 16.

   [5056] Rom. viii. 9.

   [5057] 1 Cor. xv. 53.

   [5058] Matt. xvii. 2.

   [5059] Ps. xvi. 9.

   [5060] Acts ii. 31.

   [5061] Is. xl. 5.

   [5062] xxxvii. 1 sqq.

   [5063] Job xix. 23 sqq.

   [5064] Besides medulla and seminarium Jerome has onterione = inward
   part, or pith.

   [5065] Luke i. 35.

   [5066] Ecc. ix. 8.

   [5067] Matt. xxii. 13.

   [5068] Luke xii. 7.

   [5069] John v. 25.

   [5070] Sept. "The dew which comes from thee is healing to them."

   [5071] Is. xxvi. 20.

   [5072] Dan. xii. 2.

   [5073] Is. lxvi. 24.

   [5074] Rom. vi. 4.

   [5075] Rom. viii. 11.

   [5076] Acts vii. 55.

   [5077] Ex. iv. 6.

   [5078] xviii. 3, 4. Sept.

   [5079] Luke x. 34.

   [5080] Matt. xxvii. 52.

   [5081] lxiii. 1 sq.

   [5082] Gen. xlix. 11.

   [5083] John xvi. 33.

   [5084] Ps. xlv. (?).

   [5085] Cant. viii. 5.

   [5086] Cant. v. 10.

   [5087] Apoc. xiv. 4.

   [5088] John vi. 39.

   [5089] Luke xv. 3 sq.

   [5090] John xix. 6.

   [5091] Luke xxiii. 28.

   [5092] Acts i. 11.

   [5093] Ib. 3.

   [5094] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [5095] John xxi. 9.

   [5096] Mark v.

   [5097] John xii.

   [5098] Luke xxiv. 16.

   [5099] John xx.

   [5100] John xxi. 7.

   [5101] Ib. 12.

   [5102] Born at Cyrene about b.c. 213. He maintained that we can be sure
   of nothing, neither through the senses, nor through the understanding.

   [5103] Acts xii.

   [5104] One of the Argonauts.

   [5105] Matt. xiv. 28.

   [5106] Rom. vi. 4.

   [5107] 1 Cor. xv. 50.

   [5108] Ib.

   [5109] Ib. 54.

   [5110] Ib. 55.

   [5111] 1 Sam. ii. 25.

   [5112] Laudat faciem, ad personam principum trahit. Literally, He
   praises the face (i.e. the person of Theophilus) and draws him on to
   act the part of (only fit for) princes.

   [5113] Canon 6 says that the old customs are to hold good, that all
   Egypt is to be subject to the authority of the bishop of Alexandria,
   just as the custom holds at Rome; and similarly that at Antioch, and in
   the other churches the authority of the churches should be preserved to
   them. Canon 7 says: "Since custom and ancient tradition has prevailed
   to cause honour to be given to the bishop of Ælia (Jerusalem), let him
   have the proper results of this honour; saving, however, the proper
   authority due to the metropolis" (that is, Cæsarea).

   [5114] This relates to Paulinianus, who was ordained by Epiphanius, and
   was then living with him in Cyprus.

   [5115] Theophilus, whose sympathies had suddenly changed, turned
   violently against Isidore, who had previously been his confidential
   friend, accused him of Origenism, and, on his taking refuge with
   Chrysostom at Constantinople, pursued both him and Chrysostom with
   unrelenting animosity.

   [5116] Reading portantes errorem. Another reading is, "Through the
   error of the bearer."

   [5117] John, to whom the letters were really written.

   [5118] Isidore was closely associated with the three brothers known as
   the Long Monks from their great size, and seems to have shared the
   appellation with them.

   [5119] i.e. Jerome and his friends. This was Isidore's report,
   incorporated probably into John's letter.

   [5120] Numb. xxxv. 30; Deut. xvii. 6; 2 Cor. xiii. 1.

   [5121] Dating probably from Jerome's coming to Palestine. See Prefatory
   Note.

   [5122] Jerome was ordained at Antioch, Vincentius at Constantinople.

   [5123] That is, Jerome argues, Epiphanius, who ordained him.

   [5124] This perhaps means, "No virtue has gone out of you--you have
   conferred nothing upon me."

   [5125] Lydda.

   [5126] The allusion is believed to be to the Prefect Rufinus, who was
   at the head of the government under the young Arcadius, and whose
   intrigues with Alaric with a view to obtain the empire for himself led
   to his death in the end of 395.--Comp. Letter LXXXII. 10.

   [5127] See Letter LI., which begins as John says, though Jerome denies
   it.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Against the Pelagians:

   Dialogue Between Atticus, a Catholic, and Critobulus, a Heretic.

   ------------------------

   The anti-Pelagian Dialogue is the last of Jerome's controversial works,
   having been written in the year 417, within three years of his death.
   It shows no lack of his old vigour, though perhaps something of the
   prolixity induced by old age. He looks at the subject more calmly than
   those of the previous treatises, mainly because it lay somewhat outside
   the track of his own thoughts. He was induced to interest himself in it
   by his increasing regard for Augustin, and by the coming of the young
   Spaniard, Orosius, in 414, from Augustin to sit at his feet. Pelagius
   also had come to Palestine, and, after an investigation of his tenets,
   at a small council at Jerusalem, in 415, presided over by Bishop John,
   and a second, at Diospolis in 416, had been admitted to communion.
   Jerome appears to have taken no part in these proceedings, and having
   been at peace with Bishop John for nearly twenty years, was no doubt
   unwilling to act against him. But he had come to look upon Pelagius as
   infected with the heretical "impiety," which he looked upon (i. 28) as
   far worse than moral evil; and connected him, as we see from his letter
   to Ctesiphon (CXXXIII.), with Origenism and Rufinus; and he brings his
   great knowledge of Scripture to bear upon the controversy. He quotes a
   work of Pelagius, though giving only the headings, and the numbers of
   the chapters, up to 100 (i. 26-32); and, though at times his conviction
   appears weak, and there are passages (i. 5, ii. 6-30, iii. 1) which
   give occasion to the observation that he really, if unconsciously,
   inclined to the views of Pelagius, and that he is a "Synergist," not,
   like Augustin, a thorough predestinarian, the Dialogue, as a whole, is
   clear and forms a substantial contribution to our knowledge. Although
   its tone is less violent than that of his ascetic treatises, it appears
   to have stirred up the strongest animosity against him. The adherents
   of Pelagius attacked and burned the monasteries of Bethlehem, and
   Jerome himself only escaped by taking refuge in a tower. His
   sufferings, and the interference of Pope Innocentius in his behalf, may
   be seen by referring to Letters CXXXV.-CXXXVII., with the introductory
   notes prefixed to them.

   The following is a summary of the argument: Atticus, the Augustinian,
   at once (c. 1) introduces the question: Do you affirm that, as Pelagius
   affirms, men can live without sin? Yes, says the Pelagian Critobulus,
   but I do not add, as is imputed to us, "without the grace of God."
   Indeed, the fact that we have a free will is from grace. Yes, replies
   Atticus, but what is this grace? Is it only our original nature, or is
   it needed in every act. In every act, is the reply (2); yet one would
   hardly say that we cannot mend a pen without grace (3), for, if so,
   where is our free will? But, says Atticus (5), the Scriptures speak of
   our need of God's aid in everything. In that case, says Critobulus, the
   promised reward must be given not to us but to God, Who works in us.
   Reverting then to the first point stated, Atticus asks, does the
   possibility of sinlessness extend to single acts, or to the whole life?
   Certainly to the whole as well as the part, is the answer. But we wish,
   or will to be sinless; why then are we not actually sinless? Because
   (8) we do not exert our will to the full. But (9) no one has ever lived
   without sin. Still, says the Pelagian, God commands us to be perfect,
   and he does not command impossibilities. Job, Zacharias, and Elizabeth
   are represented as perfectly righteous. No, it is answered (12), faults
   are attributed to each of them. John says, "He that is born of God
   sinneth not" (13); yet, "If we say we have no sin we deceive
   ourselves." The Apostles, though told to be perfect (14) were not
   perfect: and St. Paul says (14a), "I count not myself to have
   apprehended." Men are called just and perfect only in comparison of
   others (16), or because of general subjection to the will of God (18),
   or according to their special characteristics (19), as we may speak of
   a bishop as excellent in his office, though he may not fulfil the ideal
   of the pastoral epistles (22).

   The discussion now turns to the words of Pelagius' book. "All are ruled
   by their own will" (27). No; for Christ says, "I came not to do My own
   will." "The wicked shall not be spared in the judgment." But we must
   distinguish between the impious or heretics who will be destroyed (28)
   and Christian sinners who will be forgiven. Some of his sayings
   contradict each other or are trifling (29, 30). "The kingdom of heaven
   is promised in the Old Testament." Yes, but more fully in the New.
   Returning to the first thesis, "That a man can be without sin if he
   wills it," the Pelagian says, If things, like desires which arise
   spontaneously and have no issue, are reckoned blamable, we charge the
   sin on our Maker; to which it is only answered that, though we cannot
   understand God's ways, we must not arraign His justice. In the rest of
   the book, Atticus alone speaks, going through the Old Testament, and
   showing that each of the saints falls into some sin, which, though done
   in ignorance or half-consciousness, yet brings condemnation with it.

   Prologue.

   ------------------------

   1. After writing the [5128] letter to Ctesiphon, in which I replied to
   the questions propounded, I received frequent expostulations from the
   brethren, who wanted to know why I any longer delayed the promised work
   in which I undertook to answer all the subtleties of the preachers of
   Impassibility. [5129] For every one knows what was the contention of
   the Stoics and Peripatetics, that is, the old Academy, some of them
   asserted that the pathe, which we may call emotions, such as sorrow,
   joy, hope, fear, can be thoroughly eradicated from the minds of men;
   others that their power can be broken, that they can be governed and
   restrained, as unmanageable horses are held in check by peculiar kinds
   of bits. Their views have been explained by Tully in the "Tusculan
   Disputations," and Origen in his "Stromata" endeavours to blend them
   with ecclesiastical truth. I pass over Manichæus, [5130] Priscillianus,
   [5131] Evagrius of Ibora, Jovinianus, and the heretics found throughout
   almost the whole of Syria, who, by a perversion of the import of their
   name, are commonly called [5132] Massalians, in Greek, Euchites, all of
   whom hold that it is possible for human virtue and human knowledge to
   attain perfection, and arrive, I will not say merely at a likeness to,
   but an equality with God; and who go the length of asserting that, when
   once they have reached the height of perfection, even sins of thought
   and ignorance are impossible for them. And although in my former letter
   addressed to Ctesiphon and aimed at their errors, so far as time
   permitted, I touched upon a few points in the book which I am now
   endeavouring to hammer out, I shall adhere to the method of Socrates.
   What can be said on both sides shall be stated; and the truth will thus
   be clear when both sides express their opinions. Origen is peculiar in
   maintaining on the one hand that it is impossible for human nature to
   pass through life without sin, and on the other, that it is possible
   for a man, when he turns to better things, to become so strong that he
   sins no more.

   2. I shall add a few words in answer to those who say that I am writing
   this work because I am inflamed with envy. I have never spared
   heretics, and I have done my best to make the enemies of the Church my
   own. [5133] Helvidius wrote against the perpetual virginity of Saint
   Mary. Was it envy that led me to answer him, whom I had never seen in
   the flesh? [5134] Jovinianus, whose heresy is now being fanned into
   flame, and who disturbed the faith of Rome in my absence, was so devoid
   of gifts of utterance, and had such a pestilent style that he was a
   fitter object for pity than for envy. So far as I could, I answered him
   also. [5135] Rufinus did all in his power to circulate the blasphemies
   of Origen and the treatise "On First Principles" (Peri 'Archon), not in
   one city, but throughout the whole world. He even published the first
   book of [5136] Eusebius' "Apology for Origen" under the name of [5137]
   Pamphilus the martyr, and, as though Origen had not said enough, [5138]
   vomited forth a fresh volume on his behalf. Am I to be accused of envy
   because I answered him? and was his eloquence such a rushing torrent as
   to deter me through fear from writing or dictating anything in reply?
   [5139] Palladius, no better than a villainous slave, tried to impart
   energy to the same heresy, and to excite against me fresh prejudice on
   account of my translation of the Hebrew. Was I [5140] envious of such
   distinguished ability and nobility? Even now the [5141] mystery of
   iniquity worketh, and every one chatters about his views: yet I, it
   seems, am the only one who is filled with envy at the glory of all the
   rest; I am so poor a creature that I envy even those who do not deserve
   envy. And so, to prove to all that I do not hate the men but their
   errors, and that I do not wish to vilify any one, but rather lament the
   misfortune of men who are deceived by knowledge falsely so-called, I
   have made use of the names of Atticus and Critobulus in order to
   express our own views and those of our opponents. The truth is that all
   we who hold the Catholic faith, wish and long that, while the heresy is
   condemned, the men may be reformed. At all events, if they will
   continue in error, the blame does not attach to us who have written,
   but to them, since they have preferred a lie to the truth. And one
   short answer to our calumniators, whose curses fall upon their own
   heads, is this, that the Manichæan doctrine condemns the nature of man,
   destroys free will, and does away with the help of God. And again, that
   it is manifest madness for man to speak of himself as being what God
   alone is. Let us so walk along the royal road that we turn neither to
   the right hand nor to the left; and let us always believe that the
   eagerness of our wills is governed by the help of God. Should any one
   cry out that he is slandered and boast that he thinks with us; he will
   then show that he assents to the true faith, when he openly and
   sincerely condemns the opposite views. Otherwise his case will be that
   described by the prophet: [5142] "And yet for all this her treacherous
   sister Judah hath not returned unto me with her whole heart, but
   feignedly." It is a smaller sin to follow evil which you think is good,
   than not to venture to defend what you know for certain is good. If we
   cannot endure threats, injustice, poverty, how shall we overcome the
   flames of Babylon? Let us not lose by hollow peace what we have
   preserved by war. I should be sorry to allow my fears to teach me
   faithlessness, when Christ has put the true faith in the power of my
   choice.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5128] Letter CXXXIII.

   [5129] 'Apatheia.

   [5130] Priscillian was a Spaniard, who began to propagate his views,
   which were a mixture of various heresies, about the year 370. See
   Robertson, p. 295 sq., and Note on Jerome, Letter CXXXIII.

   [5131] Evagrius Iberita. The name is taken either from a town named
   Ibera or Ibora in Pontus, or from the province of Iberia. Jerome, in
   the letter to which he refers, styles Evagrius Hyperborita, but this is
   thought to be an error for Hyborita. It has been suggested that Jerome
   was playing on the word Iberita. He was born in 345. He wrote, amongst
   many other works, a treatise Peri apatheias (On Impassibility), and no
   doubt Jerome refers to this a few lines above. He was a zealous
   champion of Origen. See also Jerome, Letter CXXXIII. and note.

   [5132] The Massalians or Euchites derived their name from their habit
   of continual prayer. The words are etymological equivalents
   (Massalians, from tsl' to pray). The perversity lay in the
   misinterpretation of such texts as Luke xviii. 1, and 1 Thess. v. 17.

   [5133] He was a Roman lawyer. His treatise was written about a.d. 383.
   See Jerome's treatise against him in this volume.

   [5134] See introduction to Jerome's treatise against Jovinianus in this
   volume.

   [5135] See Rufinus' works, especially the Prolegomena, and Jerome's
   controversy with him in vol. iii. of this series.

   [5136] That is, Eusebius of Cæsarea (a.d. 267-338), who was called
   Pamphilus from his friendship with Pamphilus the martyr.

   [5137] Suffered martyrdom a.d. 309. He erected a library at Cæsarea of
   30,000 volumes. See Rufinus' Preface to his Apology in this series,
   vol. iii., with introductory note.

   [5138] See Rufinus on the adulteration of the works of Origen, in this
   series, vol. iii. p. 421.

   [5139] Palladius, bishop of Hellenopolis, the biographer and trusted
   friend of Chrysostom, was born about 367. He visited Bethlehem about
   387 and formed a very unfavourable opinion of Jerome. He highly
   commended Rufinus. According to Epiphanius, as well as Jerome, he was
   tainted with Origenism. Tillemont, however, thinks that another
   Palladius may be referred to in these passages. His accounts of Jerome
   and Rufinus are given in his "Historia Lausiaca," c. 78 and 118.

   [5140] Jerome was accused of envy or ill-will by Palladius. "Tanta fuit
   ejus invidia ut ab ea obrueretur virtus doctrinæ. Cum ergo multis
   diebus cum eo versatus esset sanctus Posidonius, dicit mihi in aurem,
   "Ingenua quidem Paula, quæ ejus curam gerit, præmorietur, liberata ab
   ejus invidia. Ut autem arbitror, propter hunc virum non habitabit vir
   sanctus in his locis, sed ejus pervadet invidia usque ad proprium
   fratrem."--Pallad. Hist. Laus., § 78, cf. § 82.

   [5141] 2 Thess. ii. 7.

   [5142] Jer. iii. 10.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book I.

   ------------------------

   1. Atticus. I hear, Critobulus, that you have written that man can be
   without sin, if he chooses; and that the commandments of God are easy.
   Tell me, is it true?

   Critobulus. It is true, Atticus; but our rivals do not take the words
   in the sense I attached to them.

   A. Are they then so ambiguous as to give rise to a difference as to
   their meaning? I do not ask for an answer to two questions at once. You
   laid down two propositions; the one, that [5143] man can be without
   sin, if he chooses: the other, that God's commandments are easy.
   Although, therefore, they were uttered together, let them be discussed
   separately, so that, while our faith appears to be one, no strife may
   arise through our misunderstanding each other.

   C. I said, Atticus, that man can be without sin, if he chooses; not, as
   some maliciously make us say, without the grace of God (the very
   thought is impiety), but simply that he can, if he chooses; the aid of
   the grace of God being presupposed.

   A. Is God, then, the author of your evil works?

   C. By no means. But if there is any good in me, it is brought to
   perfection through His impulse and assistance.

   A. My question does not refer to natural constitution, but to action.
   For who doubts that God is the Creator of all things? I wish you would
   tell me this: the good you do, is it your's or God's?

   C. It is mine and God's: I work and He assists.

   A. How is it then that everybody thinks you do away with the grace of
   God, and maintain that all our actions proceed from our own will?

   C. I am surprised, Atticus, at your asking me for the why and wherefore
   of other people's mistakes, and wanting to know what I did not write,
   when what I did write is perfectly clear. I said that man can be
   without sin, if he chooses. Did I add, without the grace of God?

   A. No; but the fact that you added nothing implies your denial of the
   need of grace.

   C. Nay, rather, the fact that I have not denied grace should be
   regarded as tantamount to an assertion of it. It is unjust to suppose
   we deny whatever we do not assert.

   A. You admit then that man can be sinless, if he chooses, but with the
   grace of God.

   C. I not only admit it, but freely proclaim it.

   A. So then he who does away with the grace of God is in error.

   C. Just so. Or rather, he ought to be thought impious, seeing that all
   things are governed by the pleasure of God, and that we owe our
   existence and the faculty of individual choice and desire to the
   goodness of God, the Creator. For that we have free will, and according
   to our own choice incline to good or evil, is part of His grace who
   made us what we are, in His own image and likeness.

   2. A. No one doubts, Critobulus, that all things depend on the judgment
   of Him Who is Creator of all, and that whatever we have ought to be
   attributed to His goodness. But I should like to know respecting this
   faculty, which you attribute to the grace of God, whether you reckon it
   as part of the gift bestowed in our creation, or suppose it energetic
   in our separate actions, so that we avail ourselves of its assistance
   continually; or is it the case that, having been once for all created
   and endowed with free will, we do what we choose by our own choice or
   strength? For I know that very many of your party refer all things to
   the grace of God in such a sense that they understand the power of the
   will to be a gift not of a particular, but of a general character, that
   is to say, one which is bestowed not at each separate moment, but once
   for all at creation.

   C. It is not as you affirm; but I maintain both positions, that it is
   by the grace of God we were created such as we are, and also that in
   our several actions we are supported by His aid.

   A. We are agreed, then, that in good works, besides our own power of
   choice, we lean on the help of God; in evil works we are prompted by
   the devil.

   C. Quite so; there is no difference of opinion on that point.

   A. They are wrong, then, who strip us of the help of God in our
   separate actions. The Psalmist sings: [5144] "Except the Lord build the
   house, they labour in vain who build it. Except the Lord keep the city,
   the watchman waketh but in vain;" and there are similar passages. But
   these men endeavour by perverse, or rather ridiculous interpretations,
   to twist his words to a different meaning.

   3. C. Am I bound to contradict others when you have my own answer?

   A. Your answer to what effect? That they are right, or wrong?

   C. What necessity compels me to set my opinion against other men's?

   A. You are bound by the rules of discussion, and by respect for truth.
   Do you not know that every assertion either affirms, or denies, and
   that what is affirmed or denied ought to be reckoned among good or bad
   things? You must, therefore, admit, and no thanks to you, that the
   statement to which my question relates is either a good thing or a bad.

   C. If in particular actions we must have the help of God, does it
   follow that we are unable to make a pen, [5145] or mend it when it is
   made? Can we not fashion the letters, be silent or speak, sit, stand,
   walk or run, eat or fast, weep or laugh, and so on, without God's
   assistance?

   A. From my point of view it is clearly impossible.

   C. How then have we free will, and how can we guard the grace of God
   towards us, if we cannot do even these things without God?

   4. A. The bestowal of the grace of free will is not such as to do away
   with the support of God in particular actions.

   C. The help of God is not made of no account; inasmuch as creatures are
   preserved through the grace of free will once for all given to them.
   For if without God, and except He assist me in every action, I can do
   nothing. He can neither with justice crown me for my good deeds, nor
   punish me for my evil ones, but in each case He will either receive His
   own or will condemn the assistants He gave.

   A. Tell me, then, plainly, why you do away with the grace of God. For
   whatever you destroy in the parts you must of necessity deny in the
   whole.

   C. I do not deny grace when I assert that I was so created by God, that
   by the grace of God it was put within the power of my choice either to
   do a thing or not to do it.

   A. So God falls asleep over our good actions, when once the faculty of
   free will has been given; and we need not pray to Him to assist us in
   our separate actions, since it depends upon our own choice and will
   either to do a thing if we choose, or not to do it if we do not choose.

   5. C. As in the case of other creatures, the conditions of elicit
   creation are observed; so, when once the power of free will was
   granted, everything was left to our own choice.

   A. It follows, as I said, that I ought not to beg the assistance of God
   in the details of conduct, because I consider it was given once for
   all.

   C. If He co-operates with me in everything the result is no longer
   mine, but His Who assists, or rather works in and with me; and all the
   more because I can do nothing without Him.

   A. Have you not read, pray, [5146] "that it is not of him that willeth,
   nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy!" From this we
   understand that to will and to run is ours, but the carrying into
   effect our willing and running pertains to the mercy of God, and is so
   effected that on the one hand in willing and running free will is
   preserved; and on the other, in consummating our willing and running,
   everything is left to the power of God. Of course, I ought now to
   adduce the frequent testimony of Scripture to show that in the details
   of conduct the saints intreat the help of God, and in their several
   actions desire to have Him for their helper and protector. Read through
   the Psalter, and all the utterances of the saints, and you will find
   their actions never unaccompanied by prayer to God. And this is a clear
   proof that you either deny the grace which you banish from the parts of
   life; or if you concede its presence in the parts, a concession plainly
   much against your will, you must have come over to the views of us who
   preserve free will for man, but so limit it that we do not deny the
   assistance of God in each action.

   6. C. That is a sophistical conclusion and a mere display of logical
   skill. No one can strip me of the power of free will; otherwise, if God
   were really my helper in what I do, the reward would not be due to me,
   but to Him who wrought in me.

   A. Make the most of your free will; arm your tongue against God, and
   therein prove yourself free, if you will, to blaspheme. But to go a
   step farther, there is no doubt as to your sentiments, and the
   delusions of your profession have become as clear as day. Now, let us
   turn back to the starting-point of our discussion. You said just now
   that, granted God's assistance, man may be sinless if he chooses. Tell
   me, please, for how long? For ever, or only for a short time?

   C. Your question is unnecessary. If I say for a short time, for ever
   will none the less be implied. For whatever you allow for a short time,
   you will admit may last for ever.

   A. I do not quite understand your meaning.

   C. Are you so senseless that you do not recognize plain facts?

   7. A. I am not ashamed of my ignorance. And both sides ought to be well
   agreed on a definition of the subject of dispute.

   C. I maintain this: he who can keep himself from sin one day, may do so
   another day: if he can on two, he may on three; if on three, on thirty:
   and so on for three hundred, or three thousand, or as long as ever he
   chooses to do so.

   A. Say then at once that a man may be without sin for ever, if he
   chooses. Can we do anything we like?

   C. Certainly not, for I cannot do all I should like; but all I say is
   this, that a man can be without sin, if he chooses.

   A. Be so good as to tell me this: do you think I am a man or a beast?

   C. If I had any doubt as to whether you were a man, or a beast, I
   should confess myself to be the latter.

   A. If then, as you say, I am a man, how is it that when I wish and
   earnestly desire not to sin, I do transgress?

   C. Because your choice is imperfect. If you really wished not to sin,
   you really would not.

   A. Well then, you who accuse me of not having a real desire, are you
   free from sin because you have a real desire?

   C. As though I were talking of myself whom I admit to be a sinner, and
   not of the few exceptional ones, if any, who have resolved not to sin.

   8. A. Still, I who question, and you who answer, both consider
   ourselves sinners.

   C. But we are capable of not being so, if we please.

   A. I said I did not wish to sin, and no doubt your feeling is the same.
   How is it then that what we both wish we can neither do?

   C. Because we do not wish perfectly.

   A. Show me any of our ancestors who had a perfect will and the power in
   perfection.

   C. That is not easy. And when I say that a man may be without sin if he
   chooses, I do not contend that there ever have been such; I only
   maintain the abstract possibility--if he chooses. For possibility of
   being is one thing, and is expressed in Greek by te dunamei
   (possibility); being is another, the equivalent for which is te
   energei& 139; (actuality). I can be a physician; but meanwhile I am
   not. I can be an artisan; but I have not yet learnt a trade. So,
   whatever I am able to be, though I am not that yet, I shall be if I
   choose.

   9. A. Art is one thing, that which is [5147] above art is another.
   Medical skill, craftsmanship, and so on, are found in many persons; but
   to be always without sin is a characteristic of the Divine power only.
   Therefore, either give me an instance of those who were for ever
   without sin; or, if you cannot find one, confess your impotence, lay
   aside bombast, and do not mock the ears of fools with this being and
   possibility of being of yours. For who will grant that a man can do
   what no man was ever able to do? You have not learnt even the rudiments
   of logic. For if a man is able, he is no longer unable. Either grant
   that some one was able to do what you maintain was possible to be done;
   or if no one has had this power, you must, though against your will, be
   held to this position, that no one is able to effect what yet you
   profess to be possible. That was the point at issue between the
   powerful logicians, [5148] Diodorus and [5149] Chrysippus, in their
   discussion of possibility. Diodorus says that alone can possibly happen
   which is either true or will be true. And whatever will be, that, he
   says, must of necessity happen. But whatever will not be, that cannot
   possibly happen. Chrysippus, however, says that things which will not
   be might happen; for instance, this pearl might be broken, even though
   it never will. They, therefore, who say that a man can be without sin
   if he chooses, will not be able to prove the truth of the assertion,
   unless they show that it will come to pass. But whereas the whole
   future is uncertain, and especially such things as have never occurred,
   it is clear that they say something will be which will not be. And
   Ecclesiastes supports this decision: "All that shall be, has already
   been in former ages."

   10. C. Pray answer this question: has God given possible or impossible
   commands?

   A. I see your drift. But I must discuss it later on, that we may not,
   by confusing different questions, leave our audience in a fog. I admit
   that God has given possible commands, for otherwise He would Himself be
   the author of injustice, were He to demand the doing of what cannot
   possibly be done. Reserving this until later, finish your argument that
   a man can be without sin, if he chooses. You will either give instances
   of such ability, or, if no one has had the power, you will clearly
   confess that a man cannot avoid sin always.

   C. Since you press me to give what I am not bound to give, consider
   what our Lord says, [5150] "That it is easier for a camel to go through
   a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
   heaven." And yet he said a thing might possibly happen, which never has
   happened. For no camel has ever gone through a needle's eye.

   A. I am surprised at a prudent man submitting evidence which goes
   against himself. For the passage in question does not speak of a
   possibility, but one impossibility is compared with another. As a camel
   cannot go through a needle's eye, so neither will a rich man enter the
   kingdom of heaven. Or, if you should be able to show that a rich man
   does enter the kingdom of heaven, it follows, also, that a camel goes
   through a needle's eye. You must not instance Abraham and other rich
   men, about whom we read in the Old Testament, who, although they were
   rich, entered the kingdom of heaven; for, by spending their riches on
   good works, they ceased to be rich; nay, rather, inasmuch as they were
   rich, not for themselves, but for others, they ought to be called God's
   stewards rather than rich men. But we must seek evangelical perfection,
   according to which there is the command, [5151] "If thou wilt be
   perfect, go and sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor, and
   come, follow Me."

   11. C. You are caught unawares in your own snare.

   A. How so?

   C. You quote our Lord's utterance to the effect that a man can be
   perfect. For when He says, "If thou wilt be perfect, sell all that thou
   hast, and give to the poor, and come, follow Me," He shows that a man,
   if he chooses, and if he does what is commanded, can be perfect?

   A. You have given me such a terrible blow that I am almost dazed. But
   yet the very words you quote, "If thou wilt be perfect," were spoken to
   one who could not, or rather would not, and, therefore, could not; show
   me now, as you promised, some one who would and could.

   C. Why am I compelled to produce instances of perfection, when it is
   clear from what the Saviour said to one, and through one to all, "If
   thou wilt be perfect" that it is possible for men to be perfect?

   A. That is a mere shuffle. You still stick fast in the mire. For,
   either, if a thing is possible, it has occurred at some time or other;
   or, if it never has happened, grant that it is impossible.

   12. C. Why do I any longer delay? You must be vanquished by the
   authority or Scripture. To pass over other passages, you must be
   silenced by the two in which we read the praises of Job, and of
   Zacharias and Elizabeth. For, unless I am deceived, it is thus written
   in the book of Job: [5152] "There was a man in the land of Uz, whose
   name was Job; and that man was perfect and upright, a true worshipper
   of God, and one who kept himself from every evil thing." And again:
   [5153] "Who is he that reproveth one that is righteous and free from
   sin, and speaketh words without knowledge?" Also, in the Gospel
   according to Luke, we read: [5154] "There was in the days of Herod,
   king of Judæa, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of
   Abijah: and he had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was
   Elizabeth. And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
   commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless." If a true
   worshipper of God is also without spot and without offence, and if
   those who walked in all the ordinances of the Lord are righteous before
   God, I suppose they are free from sin, and lack nothing that pertains
   to righteousness.

   A. You have cited passages which have been detached not only from the
   rest of Scripture, but from the books in which they occur. For even
   Job, after he was stricken with the plague, is convicted of having
   spoken many things against the ruling of God, and to have summoned Him
   to the bar: [5155] "Would that a man stood with God in the judgment as
   a son of man stands with his fellow." And again: [5156] "Oh that I had
   one to hear me! that the Almighty might hear my desire, and that the
   judge would himself write a book!" And again: [5157] "Though I be
   righteous, mine own mouth shall condemn me: though I be perfect, it
   shall prove me perverse. If I wash myself with snow-water, and make my
   hands never so clean, Thou hast dyed me again and again with filth.
   Mine own clothes have abhorred me." And of Zacharias it is written,
   that when the angel promised the birth of a son, he said: [5158]
   "Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife well
   stricken in years." For which answer he was at once condemned to
   silence: [5159] "Thou shalt be silent, and not able to speak, until the
   day that these things shall come to pass, because thou believest not my
   words, which shall be fulfilled in their season." From this it is clear
   that men are called righteous, and said to be without fault; but that,
   if negligence comes over them, they may fall; and that a man always
   occupies a middle place, so that he may slip from the height of virtue
   into vice, or may rise from vice to virtue; and that he is never safe,
   but must dread shipwreck even in fair weather; and, therefore, that a
   man cannot be without sin. Solomon says, [5160] "There is not a
   righteous man upon earth that doeth good and sinneth not"; and likewise
   in the book of Kings: [5161] "There is no man that sinneth not." So,
   also, the blessed David says: [5162] "Who can understand his errors?
   Cleanse Thou me from hidden faults, and keep back Thy servant from
   presumptuous sins." And again: [5163] "Enter not into judgment with Thy
   servant, for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified." Holy
   Scripture is full of passages to the same effect.

   13. C. But what answer will you give to the famous declaration of John
   the Evangelist: [5164] "We know that whosoever is begotten of God
   sinneth not; but the begetting of God keepeth him, and the evil one
   toucheth him not. We know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth
   in the evil one?"

   A. I will requite like with like, and will show that, according to you,
   the little epistle of the Evangelist contradicts itself. For, if
   whosoever is begotten of God sinneth not because His seed abideth in
   him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, how is it that the
   writer says in the same place: [5165] "If we say that we have no sin,
   we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us?" You cannot explain.
   You hesitate and are confused. Listen to the same Evangelist telling us
   that [5166] "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
   us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." We are then
   righteous when we confess that we are sinners, and our righteousness
   depends not upon our own merits, but on the mercy of God, as the Holy
   Scripture says, [5167] "The righteous man accuseth himself when he
   beginneth to speak," and elsewhere, [5168] "Tell thy sins that thou
   mayest be justified." [5169] "God hath shut up all under sin, that He
   may have mercy upon all." And the highest righteousness of man is
   this--whatever virtue he may be able to acquire, not to think it his
   own, but the gift of God. He then who is born of God does not sin, so
   long as the seed of God remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he
   is born of God. But seeing that, while the householder slept, an enemy
   sowed tares, and that when we know not, a sower by night scatters in
   the Lord's field darnel and wild oats among the good corn, this parable
   of the householder in the Gospel should excite our fears. He cleanses
   his floor, and gathers the wheat into his garner, but leaves the chaff
   to be scattered by the winds, or burned by the fire. And so we read in
   Jeremiah, [5170] "What is the chaff to the wheat? saith the Lord." The
   chaff, moreover, is separated from the wheat at the end of the world, a
   proof that, while we are in the mortal body, chaff is mixed with the
   wheat. But if you object, and ask why did the Apostle say "and he
   cannot sin, because he is born of God," I reply by asking you what
   becomes of the reward of his choice? For if a man does not sin because
   he cannot sin, free will is destroyed, and goodness cannot possibly be
   due to his efforts, but must be part of a nature unreceptive of evil.

   14. C. The task I set you just now was an easy one by way of practice
   for something more difficult. What have you to say to my next argument?
   Clever as you are, all your skill will not avail to overthrow it. I
   shall first quote from the Old Testament, then from the New. Moses is
   the chief figure in the Old Testament, our Lord and Saviour in the New.
   Moses says to the people, [5171] "Be perfect in the sight of the Lord
   your God." And the Saviour bids the Apostles [5172] "Be perfect as your
   heavenly Father is perfect." Now it was either possible for the hearers
   to do what Moses and the Lord commanded, or, if it be impossible, the
   fault does not lie with them who cannot obey, but with Him who gave
   impossible commands.

   A. This passage to the ignorant, and to those who are unaccustomed to
   meditate on Holy Scripture, and who neither know nor use it, does
   appear at first sight to favour your opinion. But when you look into
   it, the difficulty soon disappears. And when you compare passages of
   Scripture with others, that the Holy Spirit may not seem to contradict
   Himself with changing place and time, according to what is written,
   [5173] "Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy water spouts," the
   truth will show itself, that is, that Christ did give a possible
   command when He said: "Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is
   perfect," and yet that the Apostles were not perfect.

   C. I am not talking of what the Apostles did, but of what Christ
   commanded. And the fault does not lie with the giver of the command,
   but with the hearers of it, because we cannot admit the justice of him
   who commands without conceding the possibility of doing what is
   commanded.

   A. Good! Don't tell me then that a man can be without sin if he
   chooses, but that a man can be what the Apostles were not.

   C. Do you think me fool enough to dare say such a thing?

   A. Although you do not say it in so many words, however reluctant you
   may be to admit the fact, it follows by natural sequence from your
   proposition. For if a man can be without sin, and it is clear the
   Apostles were not without sin, a man can be higher than the Apostles:
   to say nothing of patriarchs and prophets whose righteousness under the
   law was not perfect, as the Apostle says, [5174] "For all have sinned,
   and fall short of the glory of God: being justified freely by His grace
   through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God set forth to
   be a propitiator."

   14a. C. This way of arguing is intricate and brings the simplicity
   which becomes the Church into the tangled thickets of philosophy. What
   has Paul to do with Aristotle? or Peter with Plato? For as the latter
   was the prince of philosophers, so was the former chief of the
   Apostles: on him the Lord's Church was firmly founded, and neither
   rushing flood nor storm can shake it.

   A. Now you are rhetorical, and while you taunt me with philosophy, you
   yourself cross over to the camp of the orators. But listen to what your
   same favourite orator says: [5175] "Let us have no more commonplaces:
   we get them at home."

   C. There is no eloquence in this, no bombast like that of the orators,
   who might be defined as persons whose object is to persuade, and who
   frame their language accordingly. We are seeking unadulterated truth,
   and use unsophisticated language. Either the Lord did not give
   impossible commands, so that they are to blame who did not do what was
   possible; or, if what is commanded cannot be done, then not they who do
   not things impossible are convicted of unrighteousness, but He Who
   commanded things impossible, and that is an impious statement.

   A. I see you are much more disturbed than is your wont; so I will not
   ply you with arguments. But let me briefly ask what you think of the
   well-known passage of the Apostle when he wrote to the Philippians:
   [5176] "Not that I have already obtained, or am already made perfect:
   but I press on, if so be that I may apprehend that for which also I was
   apprehended by Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not myself to have yet
   apprehended: but one thing I do; forgetting the things which are
   behind, and stretching forward to the things which are before, I press
   on towards the goal unto the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
   Jesus. Let us, therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if
   in anything ye are otherwise minded, even this shall God reveal unto
   you," and so on; no doubt you know the rest, which, in my desire to be
   brief, I omit. He says that he had not yet apprehended, and was by no
   means perfect; but, like an archer, aimed his arrows at the mark set up
   (more expressively called [5177] skopos in Greek), lest the shaft,
   turning to one side or the other, might show the unskilfulness of the
   archer. He further declares that he always forgot the past, and ever
   stretched forward to the things in front, thus teaching that no heed
   should be paid to the past, but the future earnestly desired; so that
   what to-day he thought perfect, while he was stretching forward to
   better things and things in front, to-morrow proves to have been
   imperfect. And thus at every step, never standing still, but always
   running, he shows that to be imperfect which we men thought perfect,
   and teaches that our only perfection and true righteousness is that
   which is measured by the excellence of God. "I press on towards the
   goal," he says, "unto the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
   Jesus." Oh, blessed Apostle Paul, pardon me, a poor creature who
   confess my faults, if I venture to ask a question. You say that you had
   not yet obtained, nor yet apprehended, nor were yet perfect, and that
   you always forgot the things behind, and stretched forward to the
   things in front, if by any means you might have part in the
   resurrection of the dead, and win the prize of your high calling. How,
   then, is it that you immediately add, "As many therefore as are perfect
   are thus minded"? (or, let us be thus minded, for the copies vary). And
   what mind is it that we have, or are to have? that we are perfect? that
   we have apprehended that which we have not apprehended, received what
   we have not received, are perfect who are not yet perfect? What mind
   then have we, or rather what mind ought we to have who are not perfect?
   To confess that we are imperfect, and have not yet apprehended, nor yet
   obtained, this is true wisdom in man: know thyself to be imperfect;
   and, if I may so speak, the perfection of all who are righteous, so
   long as they are in the flesh, is imperfect. Hence we read in Proverbs:
   [5178] "To understand true righteousness." For if there were not also a
   false righteousness, the righteousness of God would never be called
   true. The Apostle continues: "and if ye are otherwise minded, God will
   also reveal that to you." This sounds strange to my ears. He who but
   just now said, "Not that I have already obtained, or am already
   perfect"; the chosen vessel, who was so confident of Christ's dwelling
   in him that he dared to say "Do ye seek a proof of Christ that speaketh
   in me? "and yet plainly confessed that he was not perfect; he now gives
   to the multitude what he denied to himself in particular, he unites
   himself with the rest and says, "As many of us as are perfect, let us
   be thus minded." But why he said this, he explains presently. Let us,
   he means, who wish to be perfect according to the poor measure of human
   frailty, think this, that we have not yet obtained, nor yet
   apprehended, nor are yet perfect, and inasmuch as we are not yet
   perfect, and, perhaps, think otherwise than true and perfect perfection
   requires, if we are minded otherwise than is dictated by the full
   knowledge of God, God will also reveal this to us, so that we may pray
   with David and say, [5179] "Open Thou mine eyes that I may behold
   wondrous things out of Thy law."

   15. All this makes it clear that in Holy Scripture there are two sorts
   of perfection, two of righteousness, and two of fear. The first is that
   perfection, and incomparable truth, and perfect righteousness [5180]
   and fear, which is the beginning of wisdom, and which we must measure
   by the excellence of God; the second, which is within the range not
   only of men, but of every creature, and is not inconsistent with our
   frailty, as we read in the Psalms: [5181] "In Thy sight shall no man
   living be justified," is that righteousness which is said to be
   perfect, not in comparison with God, but as recognized by God. Job, and
   Zacharias, and Elizabeth, were called righteous, in respect of that
   righteousness which might some day turn to unrighteousness, and not in
   respect of that which is incapable of change, concerning which it is
   said, [5182] "I am God, and change not." And this is that which the
   Apostle elsewhere writes: [5183] "That which hath been made glorious
   hath not been made glorious in this respect, by reason of the glory
   that surpasseth"; because, that is, the righteousness of the law, in
   comparison of the grace of the Gospel, does not seem to be
   righteousness at all. [5184] "For if," he says, that which passeth away
   was with glory, much more that which remaineth is in glory. [5185] And
   again, "We know in part, and we prophesy in part; but when that which
   is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away." And,
   [5186] "For now we see in a mirror, darkly; but then face to face: now
   I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I have been known."
   And in the Psalms, [5187] "Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it
   is high, I cannot attain unto it." And again, [5188] "When I thought
   how I might know this, it was too painful for me; until I went into the
   sanctuary of God, and considered their latter end." And in the same
   place, [5189] "I was as a beast before thee: nevertheless I am
   continually with thee." And Jeremiah says, [5190] "Every man is become
   brutish and without knowledge." And to return to the Apostle Paul,
   [5191] "The foolishness of God is wiser than men." And much besides,
   which I omit for brevity's sake.

   16. C. My dear Atticus, your speech is really a clever feat of memory.
   But the labour you have spent in mustering this host of authorities is
   to my advantage. For I do not any more than you compare man with God,
   but with other men, in comparison with whom he who takes the trouble
   can be perfect. And so, when we say that man, if he chooses, can be
   without sin, the standard is the measure of man, not the majesty of
   God, in comparison with Whom no creature can be perfect.

   A. Critobulus, I am obliged to you for reminding me of the fact. For it
   is just my own view that no creature can be perfect in respect of true
   and finished righteousness. But that one differs from another, and that
   one man's righteousness is not the same as another's, no one doubts;
   nor again that one may be greater or less than another, and yet that,
   relatively to their own status and capacity, men may be called
   righteous who are not righteous when compared with others. For
   instance, the Apostle Paul, the chosen vessel who laboured more than
   all the Apostles, was, I suppose, righteous when he wrote to Timothy,
   [5192] "I have fought the good fight, I have finished the course, I
   have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of
   righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give to me at
   that day: and not only to me, but also to all them that love His
   appearing." Timothy, his disciple and imitator, whom he taught the
   rules of action and the limits of virtue, was also righteous. Are we to
   think there was one and the same righteousness in them both, and that
   he had not more merit who laboured more than all? "In my Father's house
   are many mansions." I suppose there are also different degrees of
   merit. "One star differeth from another star in glory," and in the one
   body of the Church there are different members. The sun has its own
   splendour, the moon tempers the darkness of the night; and the five
   heavenly bodies which are called planets traverse the sky in different
   tracks and with different degrees of luminousness. There are countless
   other stars whose movements we trace in the firmament. Each has its own
   brightness, and though each in respect of its own is perfect, yet, in
   comparison with one of greater magnitude, it lacks perfection. In the
   body also with its different members, the eye has one function, the
   hand another, the foot another. Whence the Apostle says, [5193] "The
   eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee: or again the head
   to the feet, I have no need of you. Are all Apostles? are all prophets?
   are all teachers? are all workers of miracles? have all gifts of
   healing? do all speak with tongues? do all interpret? But desire
   earnestly the greater gifts. But all these worketh the one and the same
   Spirit, dividing to each one severally even as He will." And here mark
   carefully that he does not say, as each member desires, but as the
   Spirit Himself will. For the vessel cannot say to him that makes it,
   [5194] "Why dost thou make me thus or thus? Hath not the potter a right
   over the clay, from the same lump to make one part a vessel unto
   honour, and another unto dishonour?" And so in close sequence he added,
   "Desire earnestly the greater gifts," so that, by the exercise of faith
   and diligence, we may win something in addition to other gifts, and may
   be superior to those who, compared with us, are in the second or third
   class. In a great house there are different vessels, some of gold, some
   of silver, brass, iron, wood. And yet while in its kind a vessel of
   brass is perfect, in comparison with one of silver it is called
   imperfect, and again one of silver, compared with one of gold, is
   inferior. And thus, when compared with one another, all things are
   imperfect and perfect. In a field of good soil, and from one sowing,
   there springs a crop thirty-fold, sixty-fold, or a hundred-fold. The
   very numbers show that there is disparity in the parts of the produce,
   and yet in its own kind each is perfect. Elizabeth and Zacharias, whom
   you adduce and with whom you cover yourself as with an impenetrable
   shield, may teach us how far they are beneath the holiness of blessed
   Mary, the Lord's Mother, who, conscious that God was dwelling in her,
   proclaims without reserve, [5195] "Behold, from henceforth all
   generations shall call me blessed. For He that is mighty hath done to
   me great things; and holy is His name. And His mercy is unto
   generations and generations of them that fear Him: He hath showed
   strength with His arm." Where, observe, she says she is blessed not by
   her own merit and virtue, but by the mercy of God dwelling in her. And
   John himself, a greater than whom has not arisen among the sons of men,
   is better than his parents. For not only does our Lord compare him with
   men, but with angels also. And yet he, who was greater on earth than
   all other men, is said to be less than the least in the kingdom of
   heaven.

   17. Need we be surprised that, when saints are compared, some are
   better, some worse, since the same holds good in the comparison of
   sins? To Jerusalem, pierced and wounded with many sins, it is said,
   [5196] "Sodom is justified by thee." It is not because Sodom, which has
   sunk for ever into ashes, is just in herself, that it is said by
   Ezekiel, [5197] "Sodom shall be restored to her former estate"; but
   that, in comparison with the more accursed Jerusalem, she appears just.
   For Jerusalem killed the Son of God; Sodom through fulness of bread and
   excessive luxury carried her lust beyond all bounds. The publican in
   the Gospel who smote upon his breast as though it were a magazine of
   the worst thoughts, and, conscious of his offences, dared not lift up
   his eyes, is justified rather than the proud Pharisee. And Thamar in
   the guise of a harlot deceived Judah, and in the estimation of this man
   himself who was deceived, was worthy of the words, [5198] "Thamar is
   more righteous than I." All this goes to prove that not only in
   comparison with Divine majesty are men far from perfection, but also
   when compared with angels, and other men who have climbed the heights
   of virtue. You may be superior to some one whom you have shown to be
   imperfect, and yet be outstripped by another; and consequently may not
   have true perfection, which, if it be perfect, is absolute.

   18. C. How is it then, Atticus, that the Divine Word urges us to
   perfection?

   A. I have already explained that in proportion to our strength each
   one, with all his power, must stretch forward, if by any means he may
   attain to, and apprehend the reward of his high calling. In short
   Almighty God, to whom, as the Apostle teaches, the Son must in
   accordance with the dispensation of the Incarnation be subjected, that
   [5199] "God may be all in all," clearly shows that all things are by no
   means subject to Himself. Hence the prophet anticipates his own final
   subjection, saying, [5200] "Shall not my soul be subject to God alone?
   for of Him cometh my salvation." And because in the body of the Church
   Christ is the head, and some of the members still resist, the body does
   not appear to be subject even to the head. For if one member suffer,
   all the members suffer with it, and the whole body is tortured by the
   pain in one member. My meaning may be more clearly expressed thus. So
   long as we have the treasure in earthen vessels, and are clothed with
   frail flesh, or rather with mortal and corruptible flesh, we think
   ourselves fortunate if, in single virtues and separate portions of
   virtue, we are subject to God. But when this mortal shall have put on
   immortality, and this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and
   death shall be swallowed up in the victory of Christ, then will God be
   all in all: and so there will not be merely wisdom in Solomon,
   sweetness in David, zeal in Elias and Phinees, faith in Abraham,
   perfect love in Peter, to whom it was said, [5201] "Simon, son of John,
   lovest thou me?" zeal for preaching in the chosen vessel, and two or
   three virtues each in others, but God will be wholly in all, and the
   company of the saints will rejoice in the whole band of virtues, and
   God will be all in all.

   19. C. Do I understand you to say that no saint, so long as he is in
   this poor body, can have all virtues?

   A. Just so, because now we prophesy in part, and know in part. It is
   impossible for all things to be in all men, for no son of man is
   immortal.

   C. How is it, then, that we read that he who has one virtue appears to
   have all?

   A. By partaking of them, not possessing them, for individuals must
   excel in particular virtues. But I confess I don't know where to find
   what you say you have read.

   C. Are you not aware that the philosophers take that view?

   A. The philosophers may, but the Apostles do not. I heed not what
   Aristotle, but what Paul, teaches.

   C. Pray does not James the Apostle [5202] write that he who stumbles in
   one point is guilty of all?

   A. The passage is its own interpreter. James did not say, as a
   starting-point for the discussion, he who prefers a rich man to a poor
   man in honour is guilty of adultery or murder. That is a delusion of
   the Stoics who maintain the equality of sins. But he proceeds thus: "He
   who said, Thou shalt not commit adultery, said also, Thou shalt not
   kill: but although thou dost not kill, yet, if thou commit adultery,
   thou art become a transgressor of the law." Light offences are compared
   with light ones, and heavy offences with heavy ones. A fault that
   deserves the rod must not be avenged with the sword; nor must a crime
   worthy of the sword, be checked with the rod.

   C. Suppose it true that no saint has all the virtues: you will surely
   grant that within the range of his ability, if a man do what he can, he
   is perfect.

   A. Do you not remember what I said before?

   C. What was it?

   A. That a man is perfect in respect of what he has done, imperfect in
   respect of what he could not do.

   C. But as he is perfect in respect of what he has done, because he
   willed to do it, so in respect of that which constitutes him imperfect,
   because he has not done it, he might have been perfect, had he willed
   to do it.

   A. Who does not wish to do what is perfect? Or who does not long to
   grow vigorously in all virtue? If you look for all virtues in each
   individual, you do away with the distinctions of things, and the
   difference of graces, and the variety of the work of the Creator, whose
   prophet cries aloud in the sacred song: [5203] "In wisdom hast thou
   made them all." Lucifer may be indignant because he has not the
   brightness of the moon. The moon may dispute over her eclipses and
   ceaseless toil, and ask why she must traverse every month the yearly
   orbit of the sun. The sun may complain and want to know what he has
   done that he travels more slowly than the moon. And we poor creatures
   may demand to know why it is that we were made men and not angels;
   although your teacher, [5204] the Ancient, the fountain from which
   these streams flow, asserts that all rational creatures were created
   equal and started fairly, like charioteers, either to succumb halfway,
   or to pass on rapidly and reach the wished-for goal. Elephants, with
   their huge bulk, and griffins, might discuss their ponderous frames and
   ask why they must go on four feet, while flies, midges, and other
   creatures like them have six feet under their tiny wings, and there are
   some creeping things which have such an abundance of feet that the
   keenest vision cannot follow their countless and simultaneous
   movements. Marcion and all the heretics who denied the Creator's works
   might speak thus. Your principle goes so far that while its adherents
   attack particular points, they are laying hands on God; they are asking
   why He only is God, why He envies the creatures, and why they are not
   all endowed with the same power and importance. You would not say so
   much (for you are not mad enough to openly fight against God), yet this
   is your meaning in other words, when you give man an attribute of God,
   and make him to be without sin like God Himself. Hence the Apostle,
   with his voice of thunder, says, concerning different graces: [5205]
   "There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit; and differences
   of ministrations, but the same Lord; and there are diversities of
   workings, but the same God, Who worketh all things in all."

   20. C. You push this one particular point too far in seeking to
   convince me that a man cannot have all excellences at the same time. As
   though God were guilty of envy, or unable to bestow upon His image and
   likeness a correspondence in all things to his Creator.

   A. Is it I or you who go too far? You revive questions already settled,
   and do not understand that likeness is one thing, equality another;
   that the former is a painting, the latter, reality. A real horse
   courses over the plains; the painted one with his chariot does not
   leave the wall. The Arians do not allow to the Son of God what you give
   to every man. Some do not dare to confess the perfect humanity of
   Christ, lest they should be compelled to accept the belief that He had
   the sins of a man as though the Creator were unequal to the act of
   creating, and the title Son of Man were co-extensive with the title Son
   of God. So either set me something else to answer, or lay aside pride
   and give glory to God.

   C. You forget a former answer of yours, and have been so busy forging
   your chain of argument, and careering through the wide fields of
   Scripture, like a horse that has slipped its bridle, that you have not
   said a single word about the main point. Your forgetfulness is a
   pretext for escaping the necessity of a reply. It was foolish in me to
   concede to you for the nonce what you asked, and to suppose that you
   would voluntarily give up what you had received, and would not need a
   reminder to make you pay what you owed.

   A. If I mistake not, it was the question of possible commands of which
   I deferred the answer. Pray proceed as you think best.

   21. C. The commands which God has given are either possible or
   impossible. If possible, it is in our power to do them, if we choose.
   If impossible, we cannot be held guilty for omitting duties which it is
   not given us to fulfill. Hence it results that, whether God has given
   possible or impossible commands, a man can be without sin if he
   chooses.

   A. I beg your patient attention, for what we seek is not victory over
   an opponent, but the triumph of truth over falsehood. God has put
   within the power of mankind all arts, for we see that a vast number of
   men have mastered them. To pass over those which the Greeks call [5206]
   banausoi, as we may say, the manual arts, I will instance grammar,
   rhetoric, the three sorts of philosophy--physics, ethics,
   logic--geometry also, and astronomy, astrology, arithmetic, music,
   which are also parts of philosophy; medicine, too, in its threefold
   division--theory, investigation, practice; a knowledge of law in
   general and of particular enactments. Which of us, however clever he
   may be, will be able to understand them all, when the most eloquent of
   orators, discussing rhetoric and jurisprudence, said: "A few may excel
   in one, in both no one can." You see, then, that God has commanded what
   is possible, and yet, that no one can by nature attain to what is
   possible. Similarly he has given different rules and various virtues,
   all of which we cannot possess at the same time. Hence it happens that
   a virtue which in one person takes the chief place, or is found in
   perfection, in another is but partial; and yet, he is not to blame who
   has not all excellence, nor is he condemned for lacking that which he
   has not; but he is justified through what he does possess. The Apostle
   described the character of a bishop when he wrote to Timothy, [5207]
   "The bishop, therefore, must be without reproach, the husband of one
   wife, temperate, modest, orderly, given to hospitality, apt to teach;
   no brawler, no striker; but gentle, not contentious, no lover of money;
   one that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection
   with all modesty." And again, "Not a novice, lest, being puffed up, he
   fall into the condemnation of the devil. Moreover, he must have good
   testimony from them that are without, lest he fall into reproach and
   the snare of the devil." Writing also to his disciple Titus, he briefly
   points out what sort of bishops he ought to ordain: [5208] "For this
   cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things
   that were wanting, and appoint elders in every city, as I gave thee
   charge; if any man is blameless, the husband of one wife, having
   children that believe, who are not accused of riot or unruly. For the
   bishop must be blameless (or free from accusation, for so much is
   conveyed by the original) as God's steward; not self-willed, not soon
   angry, no brawler, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but given to
   hospitality, kind, modest, just, holy, temperate; holding to the
   faithful word which is according to the teaching, that he may be able
   both to exhort in the sound doctrine, and to convict the gainsayers." I
   will not now say anything of the various rules relating to different
   persons, but will confine myself to the commands connected with the
   bishop.

   22. God certainly wishes bishops or priests to be such as the chosen
   vessel teaches they should be. As to the first qualification it is
   seldom or never that one is found without reproach; for who is it that
   has not some fault, like a mole or a wart on a lovely body? If the
   Apostle himself says of Peter that he did not tread a straight path in
   the truth of the Gospel, and was so far to blame that even Barnabas was
   led away into the same dissimulation, who will be indignant if that is
   denied to him which the chief of the Apostles had not? Then, supposing
   you find one, "the husband of one wife, sober-minded, orderly, given to
   hospitality," the next attribute--didaktikon , apt to teach, not merely
   as the Latin renders the word, apt to be taught--you will hardly find
   in company with the other virtues. A bishop or priest that is a
   brawler, or a striker, or a lover of money, the Apostle rejects, and in
   his stead would have one gentle, not contentious, free from avarice,
   one that rules well his own house, and what is very hard, one who has
   his children in subjection with all modesty, whether they be children
   of the flesh or children of the faith. "With all modesty," he says. It
   is not enough for him to have his own modesty unless it be enhanced by
   the modesty of his children, companions, and servants, as David says,
   [5209] "He that walketh in a perfect way, he shall minister unto me."
   Let us consider, also, the emphasis laid on modesty by the addition of
   the words "having his children in subjection with all modesty." Not
   only in deed but in word and gesture must he hold aloof from immodesty,
   lest perchance the experience of Eli be his. Eli certainly rebuked his
   sons, saying, [5210] "Nay, my sons, nay; it is not a good report which
   I hear of you." He chided them, and yet was punished, because he should
   not have chided, but cast them off. What will he do who rejoices at
   vice or lacks the courage to correct it? Who fears his own conscience,
   and therefore pretends to be ignorant of what is in everybody's mouth?
   The next point is that the bishop must be free from accusation, that he
   have a good report from them who are without, that no reproaches of
   opponents be levelled at him, and that they who dislike his doctrine
   may be pleased with his life. I suppose it would not be easy to find
   all this, and particularly one "able to resist the gain-sayers," to
   check and overcome erroneous opinions. He wishes no novice to be
   ordained bishop, and yet in our time we see the youthful novice sought
   after as though he represented the highest righteousness. If baptism
   immediately made a man righteous, and full of all righteousness, it was
   of course idle for the Apostle to repel a novice; but baptism annuls
   old sins, does not bestow new virtues; it looses from prison, and
   promises rewards to the released if he will work. Seldom or never, I
   say, is there a man who has all the virtues which a bishop should have.
   And yet if a bishop lacked one or two of the virtues in the list, it
   does not follow that he can no longer be called righteous, nor will he
   be condemned for his deficiencies, but will be crowned for what he has.
   For to have all and lack nothing is the virtue of Him [5211] "Who did
   no sin; neither was guile found in His mouth; Who, when He was reviled,
   reviled not again;" Who, confident in the consciousness of virtue,
   said, [5212] "Behold the prince of this world cometh, and findeth
   nothing in me;" [5213] "Who, being in the form of God, thought it not
   robbery to be on an equality with God, but emptied Himself, taking the
   form of a servant, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
   the cross. Wherefore God gave Him the name which is above every name,
   that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven,
   and things on earth, and things under the earth." If, then, in the
   person of a single bishop you will either not find at all, or with
   difficulty, even a few of the things commanded, how will you deal with
   the mass of men in general who are bound to fulfil all the
   commandments?

   23. Let us reason from things bodily to things spiritual. One man is
   swift-footed, but not strong-handed. That man's movements are slow, but
   he stands firm in battle. This man has a fine face, but a harsh voice:
   another is repulsive to look at, but sings sweetly and melodiously.
   There we see a man of great ability, but equally poor memory; here is
   another whose memory serves him, but whose wits are slow. In the very
   discussions with which when we were boys we amused ourselves, all the
   disputants are not on a level, either in introducing a subject, or in
   narrative, or in digressions, or wealth of illustration, and charm of
   peroration, but their various oratorical efforts exhibit different
   degrees of merit. Of churchmen I will say more. Many discourse well
   upon the Gospels, but in explaining an Apostle's meaning are unequal to
   themselves. Others, although most acute in the New Testament are dumb
   in the Psalms and the Old Testament. I quite agree with Virgil--Non
   omnia possumus omnes; and seldom or never is the rich man found who in
   the abundance of his wealth has everything in equal proportions. That
   God has given possible commands, I admit no less than you. But it is
   not for each one of us to make all these possible virtues our own, not
   because our nature is weak, for that is a slander upon God, but because
   our hearts and minds grow weary and cannot keep all virtues
   simultaneously and perpetually. And if you blame the Creator for having
   made you subject to weariness and failure, I shall reply, your censure
   would be still more severe if you thought proper to accuse Him of not
   having made you God. But you will say, if I have not the power, no sin
   attaches to me. You have sinned because you have not done what another
   could do. And again, he in comparison with whom you are inferior will
   be a sinner in respect of some other virtue, relatively to you or to
   another person; and thus it happens that whoever is thought to be
   first, is inferior to him who is his superior in some other particular.

   24. C. If it is impossible for man to be without sin, what does the
   Apostle Jude mean by writing, [5214] "Now unto Him that is able to keep
   you without sin, and to set you before the presence of His glory
   without blemish"? This is clear proof that it is possible to keep a man
   without sin and without blemish.

   A. You do not understand the passage. We are not told that a man can be
   without sin, which is your view, but that God, if He chooses, can keep
   a man free from sin, and of His mercy guard him so that he may be
   without blemish. And I say that all things are possible with God; but
   that everything which a man desires is not possible to him, and
   especially, an attribute which belongs to no created thing you ever
   read of.

   C. I do not say that a man is without sin, which, perhaps, appears to
   you to be possible; but that he may be, if he chooses. For actuality is
   one thing, possibility another. In the actual we look for an instance;
   possibility implies that our power to act is real.

   A. You are trifling, and forget the proverb, "Don't do what is done."
   You keep turning in the same mire, [5215] and only make more dirt. I
   shall, therefore, tell you, what is clear to all, that you are trying
   to establish a thing that is not, never was, and, perhaps, never will
   be. To employ your own words, and show the folly and inconsistency of
   your argument, I say that you are maintaining an impossible
   possibility. For your proposition, that a man can be without sin if he
   chooses, is either true or false. If it be true, show me who the man
   is; if it be false, whatever is false can never happen. But let us have
   no more of these notions. Hissed off the stage, and no longer daring to
   appear in public, they should stay on the book shelves, and not let
   themselves be heard.

   25. Let us proceed to other matters. And here I must speak
   uninterruptedly, so far, at least, as is consistent with giving you an
   opportunity of refuting me, or asking any question you think fit.

   C. I will listen patiently, though I cannot say gladly. The ability of
   your reasoning will strike me all the more, while I am amazed at its
   falsity.

   A. Whether what I am going to say is true or false, you will be able to
   judge when you have heard it.

   C. Follow your own method. I am resolved, if I am unable to answer, to
   hold my tongue rather than assent to a lie.

   A. What difference does it make whether I defeat you speaking or
   silent, and, as it is in the [5216] story of Proteus, catch you asleep
   or awake?

   C. When you have said what you like, you shall hear what you will
   certainly not like. For though truth may be put to hard shifts it
   cannot be subdued.

   A. I want to sift your opinions a little, that your followers may know
   what an inspired genius you are. You say, "It is impossible for any but
   those who have the knowledge of the law to be without sin"; and you,
   consequently, shut out from righteousness a large number of Christians,
   and, preacher of sinlessness though you are, declare nearly all to be
   sinners. For how many Christians have that knowledge of the law which
   you can find but seldom, or hardly at all, in many doctors of the
   Church? But your liberality is so great that, in order to stand well
   with your Amazons, you have elsewhere written, "Even women ought to
   have a knowledge of the law," although the Apostle preaches that women
   ought to keep silence in the churches, and if they want to know
   anything consult their husbands at home. And you are not content with
   having given your cohort a knowledge of Scripture, but you must delight
   yourself with their songs and canticles, for you have a heading to the
   effect that "Women also should sing unto God." Who does not know that
   women should sing in the privacy of their own rooms, away from the
   company of men and the crowded congregation? But you allow what is not
   lawful, and the consequence is, that, with the support of their master,
   they make an open show of that which should be done with modesty, and
   with no eye to witness.

   26. You go on to say, "The servant of God should utter from his lips no
   bitterness, but ever that which is sweet and pleasant"; and as though a
   servant of God were one thing, a doctor and priest of the Church
   another, forgetting what was previously laid down, you say in another
   heading, "A priest or doctor ought to watch the actions of all, and
   confidently rebuke sinners, lest he be responsible for them and their
   blood be required at his hands." And, not satisfied with saying it
   once, you repeat it, and inculcate that, "A priest or doctor should
   flatter no one, but boldly rebuke all, lest he destroy both himself and
   those who hear him." Is there so little harmony in one and the same
   work that you do not know what you have previously said? For if the
   servant of God ought to utter no bitterness from his mouth, but always
   that which is sweet and pleasant, it follows either that a priest and
   doctor will not be servants of God who ought to confidently rebuke
   sinners, and flatter no one, but boldly reprove all: or, if a priest
   and a doctor are not only servants of God, but have the chief place
   among His servants, it is idle to reserve smooth and pleasant speeches
   for the servants of God, for these are characteristic of heretics and
   of them who wish to deceive; as the Apostle says, [5217] "They that are
   such serve not our Lord Christ but their own belly, and by their smooth
   and fair speech they beguile the hearts of the innocent." Flattery is
   always insidious, crafty, and smooth. And the flatterer is well
   described by the philosophers as "a pleasant enemy." Truth is bitter,
   of gloomy visage and wrinkled brow, and distasteful to those who are
   rebuked. Hence the Apostle says, [5218] "Am I become your enemy,
   because I tell you the truth?" And the comic poet tells us that
   "Obsequiousness is the mother of friendship, truth of enmity."
   Wherefore we also eat the Passover with bitter herbs, and the chosen
   vessel teaches that the Passover should be kept with truth and
   sincerity. Let truth in our case be plain speaking, and bitterness will
   instantly follow.

   27. In another place you maintain that "All are governed by their own
   free choice." What Christian can bear to hear this? For if not one, nor
   a few, nor many, but all of us are governed by our own free choice,
   what becomes of the help of God? And how do you explain the text,
   [5219] "A man's goings are ordered by the Lord"? And [5220] "A man's
   way is not in himself"; and [5221] "No one can receive anything, unless
   it be given him from above"; and elsewhere, [5222] "What hast thou
   which thou didst not receive? But if thou didst receive it, why dost
   thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?" Our Lord and Saviour
   says: [5223] "I am come down from heaven not to do Mine own will, but
   the will of the Father who sent Me." And in another place, [5224]
   "Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me; nevertheless not
   My will, but Thine be done." And in the Lord's prayer, [5225] "Thy will
   be done as in heaven, so on earth." How is it that you are so rash as
   to do away with all God's help? Elsewhere, you make a vain attempt to
   append the words "not without the grace of God"; but in what sense you
   would have them understood is clear from this passage, for you do not
   admit His grace in separate actions, but connect it with our creation,
   the gift of the law, and the power of free will.

   28. The argument of the next section is, "In the day of judgment, no
   mercy will be shown to the unjust and to sinners, but they must be
   consumed in eternal fire." Who can bear this, and suffer you to
   prohibit the mercy of God, and to sit in judgment on the sentence of
   the Judge before the day of judgment, so that, if He wished to show
   mercy to the unjust and the sinners, He must not, because you have
   given your veto? For you say it is written in the one hundred and
   fourth Psalm, [5226] "Let sinners cease to be in the earth, and the
   wicked be no more." And in Isaiah, [5227] "The wicked and sinners shall
   be burned up together, and they who forsake God shall be consumed." Do
   you not know that mercy is sometimes blended with the threatenings of
   God? He does not say that they must be burnt with eternal fires, but
   let them cease to be in the earth, and the wicked be no more. For it is
   one thing for them to desist from sin and wickedness, another for them
   to perish for ever and be burnt in eternal fire. And as for the passage
   which you quote from Isaiah, "Sinners and the wicked shall be burned up
   together," he does not add for ever. "And they who forsake God shall be
   consumed." This properly refers to heretics, who leave the straight
   path of the faith, and shall be consumed if they will not return to the
   Lord whom they have forsaken. And the same sentence is ready for you if
   you neglect to turn to better things. Again, is it not marvellous
   temerity to couple the wicked and sinners with the impious, for the
   distinction between them is great? Every impious person is wicked and a
   sinner; but we cannot conversely say every sinner and wicked person is
   also impious, for impiety properly belongs to those who have not the
   knowledge of God, or, if they have once had it, lose it by
   transgression. But the wounds of sin and wickedness, like faults in
   general, admit of healing. Hence, it is written, [5228] "Many are the
   scourges of the sinner"; it is not said that he is eternally destroyed.
   And through all the scourging and torture the faults of Israel are
   corrected, [5229] "For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and
   scourgeth every son whom He receiveth." It is one thing to smite with
   the affection of a teacher and a parent; another to be madly cruel
   towards adversaries. Wherefore, we sing in the first Psalm, [5230] "The
   impious do not rise in the judgment," for they are already sentenced to
   destruction; "nor sinners in the counsel of the just." To lose the
   glory of the resurrection is a different thing from perishing for ever.
   "The hour cometh," he says, [5231] "In which all that are in the tombs
   shall hear His voice, and shall come forth: they that have done good
   unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done ill unto the
   resurrection of judgment." And so the Apostle, in the same sense,
   because in the same Spirit, says to the Romans, [5232] "As many as have
   sinned without law shall also perish without law; and as many as have
   sinned under law, shall be judged by law." The man without law is the
   unbeliever who will perish for ever. Under the law is the sinner who
   believes in God, and who will be judged by the law, and will not
   perish. If the wicked and sinners are to be burned with everlasting
   fire, are you not afraid of the sentence you pass on yourself, seeing
   that you admit you are wicked and a sinner, while still you argue that
   a man is not without sin, but that he may be. It follows that the only
   person who can be saved is an individual who never existed, does not
   exist, and perhaps never will, and that all our predecessors of whom we
   read must perish. Take your own case. You are puffed up with all the
   pride of Cato, and have [5233] Milo's giant shoulders; but is it not
   amazing temerity for you, who are a sinner, to take the name of a
   teacher? If you are righteous, and, with a false humility, say you are
   a sinner, we may be surprised, but we shall rejoice at having so unique
   a treasure, and at reckoning amongst our friends a personage unknown to
   patriarch, prophet, and Apostle. And if Origen does maintain that no
   rational creatures ought to be lost, and allows repentance to the
   devil, what is that to us, who say that the devil and his attendants,
   and all impious persons and transgressors, perish eternally, and that
   [5234] Christians, if they be overtaken by sin, must be saved after
   they have been punished?

   29. [5235] Besides all this you add two chapters which contradict one
   another, and which, if true, would effectually close your mouth.
   "Except a man have learned, he cannot be acquainted with wisdom and
   understand the Scriptures." And again, "He that has not been taught,
   ought not to assume that he knows the law." You must, then, either
   produce the master from whom you learned, if you are lawfully to claim
   the knowledge of the law; or, if your master is a person who never
   learned from any one else, and taught you what he did nor know himself,
   it follows that you are not acting rightly in claiming a knowledge of
   Scripture, when you have not been taught, and in starting as a master
   before you have been a disciple. And yet, perhaps, with your customary
   humility, you make your boast that the Lord Himself, Who teaches all
   knowledge, was your master, and that, like Moses in the cloud and
   darkness, face to face, you hear the words of God, and so, with the
   [5236] halo round your head, take the lead of us. And even this is not
   enough, but all at once you turn Stoic, and thunder in our ears Zeno's
   proud maxims. "A Christian ought to be so patient that if any one
   wished to take his property he would let it go with joy." Is it not
   enough for us patiently to lose what we have, without returning thanks
   to him who ill-treats and plunders us, and sending after him all
   blessings? The Gospel teaches that to him who would go to law with us,
   and by strife and litigation take away our coat, we must give our cloak
   also. It does not enjoin the giving of thanks and joy at the loss of
   our property. What I say is this, not that there is any enormity in
   your view, but that everywhere you are prone to exaggeration, and
   indulge in ambitious flights. This is why you add that "The bravery of
   dress and ornament is an enemy of God." What enmity, I should like to
   know, is there towards God if my tunic is cleaner than usual, or if the
   bishop, priest, or deacon, or any other ecclesiastics, at the offering
   of the sacrifices walk in white? Beware, ye clergy; beware, ye monks;
   widows and virgins, you are in peril unless the people see you begrimed
   with dirt, and clad in rags. I say nothing of lay-men, who proclaim
   open war and enmity against God if they wear costly and elegant
   apparel.

   30. Let us hear the rest. "We must love our enemies as we do our
   neighbours"; and immediately, falling into a deep slumber, you lay down
   this proposition: "We must never believe an enemy." Not a word is
   needed from me to show the contradiction here. You will say that both
   propositions are found in Scripture, but you do not observe the
   particular connection in which the passages occur. I am told to love my
   enemies and pray for my persecutors. Am I bidden to love them as though
   they were my neighbours, kindred, and friends, and to make no
   difference between a rival and a relative? If I love my enemies as my
   neighbours, what more affection can I show to my friends? If you had
   maintained this position, you ought to have taken care not to
   contradict yourself by saying that we must never believe an enemy. But
   even the law teaches us how an enemy should be loved. [5237] If an
   enemy's beast be fallen, we must raise it up. And the Apostle tells us,
   [5238] "If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink.
   For by so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head," not by
   way of curse and condemnation, as most people think, but to chasten and
   bring him to repentance, so that, overcome by kindness, and melted by
   the warmth of love, he may no longer be an enemy.

   31. Your next point is that "the kingdom of heaven is promised even in
   the Old Testament," and you adduce evidence from the Apocrypha,
   although it is clear that the kingdom of heaven was first preached
   under the Gospel by John the Baptist, and our Lord and Saviour, and the
   Apostles. Read the Gospels. John the Baptist cries in the desert,
   [5239] "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand"; and concerning
   the Saviour it is written, [5240] "From that time He began to preach
   and to say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." And again,
   [5241] "Jesus went round about the towns and villages, teaching in
   their synagogues, and preaching the kingdom of God." And He commanded
   His Apostles to [5242] "go and preach, saying, the kingdom of heaven is
   at hand." But you call us Manichæans because we prefer the Gospel to
   the law, and say that in the latter we have the shadow, in the former,
   the substance, and you do not see that your foolishness goes hand in
   hand with impudence. It is one thing to condemn the law, as Manichæus
   did; it is another to prefer the Gospel to the law, for this is in
   accordance with apostolic teaching. In the law the servants of the Lord
   speak, in the Gospel the Lord Himself; in the former are the promises,
   in the latter their fulfilment; there are the beginnings, here is
   perfection; in the law the foundations of works are laid; in the Gospel
   the edifice is crowned with the top-stone of faith and grace. I have
   mentioned this to show the character of the teaching given by our
   distinguished professor.

   32. The hundredth heading runs thus: "A man can be without sin, and
   easily keep the commandments of God if he chooses," as to which enough
   has already been said. And although he professes to imitate, or rather
   complete the work of the blessed martyr Cyprian in the treatise which
   the latter wrote to [5243] Quirinus, he does not perceive that he has
   said just the opposite in the work under discussion. Cyprian, in the
   fifty-fourth heading of the third book, lays it down that no one is
   free from stain and without sin, and he immediately gives proofs, among
   them the passage in Job, [5244] "Who is cleansed from uncleanness? Not
   he who has lived but one day upon the earth." [5245] And in the
   fifty-first Psalm, "Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
   mother conceive me." And in the Epistle of John, [5246] "If we say that
   we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us." You,
   on the other hand, maintain that "A man can be without sin," and that
   you may give your words the semblance of truth, you immediately add,
   "And easily keep the commandments of God, if he chooses," and yet they
   have been seldom or never kept by any one. Now, if they were easy, they
   ought to have been kept by all. But if, to concede you a point, at rare
   intervals some one may be found able to keep them, it is clear that
   what is rare is difficult. And by way of supplementing this and
   displaying the greatness of your own virtues (we are to believe,
   forsooth, that you bring forth the sentiment out of the treasure of a
   good conscience), you have a heading to the effect that: "We ought not
   to commit even light offences." And for fear some one might think you
   had not explained in the work the meaning of light, you add that, "We
   must not even think an evil thought," forgetting the words, [5247] "Who
   understands his offences? Clear thou me from hidden faults, and keep
   back thy servant from presumptuous sins, O Lord." You should have known
   that the Church admits even failures through ignorance and sins of mere
   thought to be offences; so much so that she bids sacrifices be offered
   for errors, and the high priest who makes intercession for the whole
   people previously offers victims for himself. Now, if he were not
   himself righteous, he would never be commanded to offer for others.
   Nor, again, would he offer for himself if he were free from sins of
   ignorance. If I were to attempt to show that error and ignorance is
   sin, I must roam at large over the wide fields of Scripture.

   33. C. Pray have you not read that [5248] "He who looks upon a woman to
   lust after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart?"
   It seems that not only are the look and the allurements to vice
   reckoned as sin, but whatever it be to which we give assent. For either
   we can avoid an evil thought, and consequently may be free from sin;
   or, if we cannot avoid it, that is not reckoned as sin which cannot be
   avoided.

   A. Your argument is ingenious, but you do not see that it goes against
   Holy Scripture, which declares that even ignorance is not without sin.
   Hence it was that Job offered sacrifices for his sons, lest, perchance,
   they had unwittingly sinned in thought. And if, when one is cutting
   wood, the axe-head flies from the handle and kills a man, the owner is
   [5249] commanded to go to one of the cities of refuge and stay there
   until the high priest dies; that is to say, until he is redeemed by the
   Saviour's blood, either in the baptistery, or in penitence which is a
   copy of the grace of baptism, through the ineffable mercy of the
   Saviour, who [5250] would not have any one perish, nor delights in the
   death of sinners, but would rather that they should be converted and
   live.

   C. It is surely strange justice to hold me guilty of a sin of error of
   which my conscience does not accuse itself. I am not aware that I have
   sinned, and am I to pay the penalty for an offence of which I am
   ignorant? What more can I do, if I sin voluntarily?

   A. Do you expect me to explain the purposes and plans of God? The Book
   of Wisdom gives an answer to your foolish question: [5251] "Look not
   into things above thee, and search not things too mighty for thee." And
   elsewhere, [5252] "Make not thyself overwise, and argue not more than
   is fitting." And in the same place, "In wisdom and simplicity of heart
   seek God." You will perhaps deny the authority of this book; listen
   then to the Apostle blowing the Gospel trumpet: [5253] "O the depth of
   the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable
   are His judgments, and His ways past tracing out! For who hath known
   the mind of the Lord? or who hath been His counsellor?" Your questions
   are such as he elsewhere describes: [5254] "But foolish and ignorant
   questioning avoid, knowing that they gender strifes." And in
   Ecclesiastes (a book concerning which there can be no doubt) we read,
   [5255] "I said, I will be wise, but it was far from me. That which is
   exceeding deep, who can find it out?" You ask me to tell you why the
   potter makes one vessel to honour, another to dishonour, and will not
   be satisfied with Paul, who replies on behalf of his Lord, [5256] "O
   man, who art thou that repliest against God?"

   The remainder of this book is occupied by a series of quotations from
   the Old Testament, designed to show that it is not only the outer and
   conscious act which is reckoned sinful, but the opposition to the
   Divine will, which is often implicit and half-conscious. Occasionally,
   also, the speaker shows how the texts quoted enforce the argument which
   he has before used, that men may be spoken of as righteous in a general
   sense, yet by no means free from sins of thought or desire, if not of
   act.

   The passages quoted are:

   Gen. viii. 21. I will not curse the ground....for the mind of man is
   set on evil from his youth.

   xvii. 17, xviii. 12. Abraham and Sarah laughing at the promise.

   xxxvii. 35. Jacob's excessive grief.

   Exod. xxi. 12, 13. The guilt of one who slays another unawares.

   Lev. iv. 2, 27. Offerings for sins of ignorance.

   v. 3. Offerings for ceremonial uncleanness.

   ix. 1. Offerings for Aaron at his consecration.

   xii. 6. Offerings for women after childbirth.

   xiv. 1, 6, xvi. 6, xii. 7. Offerings for the leper.

   xv. 31, xvi. 2, 5. Offerings for the people on the day of atonement.

   xxii. 14. Eating the hallowed things ignorantly; compared with 1 Cor.
   xi. 27, 28, of careless participation in Sacrament.

   Numbers vi. 1. Offerings for the Nazarite.

   xiv. 7, vii. 28, 29. Offerings for imploring God's Mercy.

   xxviii. 15, 22, xxix. 5, v. 11, 17. Offerings at the feast.

   Numbers xxxv. 13. The cities of refuge provided for manslayers.

   Deut. ix. 6, xviii. 13. Israel warned not to boast of righteousness.

   xviii. 9-12, v. 14, 15. Perfection used only of avoiding idolatry.

   xxii. 8. The housetop without a parapet makes a man guilty.

   xxiii. 2. Defilement from unconscious personal acts.

   Josh. vii. 12. The people made guilty by the sin of Achan.

   xi. 19, 20. The racial guilt of the Canaanites.

   1 Sam. xiv. 27. Jonathan made guilty by tasting the honey.

   xvi. 6. The Lord sees the heart, not the outward appearance.

   2 Sam. iv. 11. Ishbosheth spoken of as righteous.

   vi. 7, 8. Uzzah smitten for carelessness.

   2 Sam. xxiv. 10. David's numbering the people.

   1 Kings viii. 46. Solomon's Prayer--There is none that sinneth not.

   xiv. 5. The prophet detecting the motive of Jeroboam's wife.

   2 Kings iv. 27. Elijah seeing the Shunamite's heart.

   1 Chron. ii. 32. Sept. Half-prophets.

   Habakkuk iii. 1. Vulgate. A prayer "for sins of ignorance" ("upon
   Shigionoth"), supposed to be in recognition of over-boldness in i. 2-4.

   Ezek. xlvi. 20. The sacrifice of Ezekiel's restored temple.

   Jer. x. 23. The way of man not in himself.

   xvii. 9. The heart deceitful.

   Prov. xiv. 12. A way that seemeth right to a man.

   xix. 21. Many devices in a man's heart.

   xx. 9. Who can say, I have a clean heart?

   17. Who will boast that he is clean?

   Eccl. vii. 16. The heart of a man is full of wickedness.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5143] See S. Aug. De Sp. et Lit., c. i.

   [5144] Ps. cxxvii. 1.

   [5145] Pumice terere.

   [5146] Rom. ix. 16.

   [5147] Reading quod super artes est.

   [5148] That is, Diodorous, surnamed Cronus, who lived at Alexandria in
   the reign of Ptolemy Soter (b.c. 323-285). He was the teacher of Philo.
   For his discussions On the Possible, Zeller's "Socrates and the
   Socratic Schools," Reichel's translation, pp. 272, 273, and authorities
   there cited, may be consulted.

   [5149] Died b.c. 207, aged 73. He was the first to base the Stoic
   doctrine on something like systematic reasoning.

   [5150] S. Matt. xix. 24.

   [5151] S. Matt. xix. 21.

   [5152] Job i. 1.

   [5153] This appears to be an inaccurate quotation made from memory.

   [5154] S. Luke i. 5 sqq.

   [5155] Job xvi. 21. Vulg. R.V. Margin--"That one might plead for a man
   with God as a son of man pleadeth for his neighbour."

   [5156] Job xxxi. 35.

   [5157] Job ix. 20, 30, 31.

   [5158] S. Luke i. 18.

   [5159] Ib. 20.

   [5160] Eccles. vii. 21.

   [5161] 2 Chron vi. 36.

   [5162] Ps. xix. 12, 13.

   [5163] Ps. cxliii. 2.

   [5164] 1 John v. 18, 19.

   [5165] 1 John i. 8.

   [5166] 1 John i. 9.

   [5167] Prov. xviii. 17, Vulg. nearly.

   [5168] Is. xliii. 26, Sept.

   [5169] Rom. xi. 32.

   [5170] Jer. xxiii. 28.

   [5171] Deut. xviii. 13.

   [5172] S. Matt. v. 48.

   [5173] Ps. xli. 7.

   [5174] Rom. iii. 23, 24. So R.V. Margin--"To be propitiatory."

   [5175] Cic. Lib. iv. Acad. Quæst.

   [5176] Phil. iii. 12-16.

   [5177] From scheptomai , to keep watch.

   [5178] Prov. i. 3, Sept.

   [5179] Ps. cxix. 18.

   [5180] The reading is much disputed.

   [5181] Ps. cxliii. 2.

   [5182] Malach. iii. 6.

   [5183] 2 Cor. iii. 10.

   [5184] Ib. 11.

   [5185] 1 Cor. xiii. 9, 10.

   [5186] 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

   [5187] cxxxix. 6.

   [5188] Ps. lxxiii. 16, 17.

   [5189] Ibid. 22, 23.

   [5190] Jer. x. 14.

   [5191] 1 Cor. i. 25.

   [5192] 2 Tim. iv. 7, 8.

   [5193] 1 Cor. xii. 21, 29, 11.

   [5194] Rom. ix. 21.

   [5195] S. Luke i. 48 sq.

   [5196] Lam. iv. 6.

   [5197] Ezek. xvi. 55.

   [5198] Gen. xxxviii. 26.

   [5199] 1 Cor. xv. 28.

   [5200] Ps. lxii. 2.

   [5201] S. John xxi. 15-17.

   [5202] James ii. 10.

   [5203] Ps. civ. 24.

   [5204] According to some, Plato: more probably, Origen, the word
   archaios being an allusion to the title of his chief work, Peri
   'Archon.

   [5205] 1 Cor. xii. 4, 5.

   [5206] That is, mean.

   [5207] 1 Tim. iii. 2 sq.

   [5208] Titus i. 5 sq.

   [5209] Ps. ci. 6.

   [5210] 1 Sam. ii. 24.

   [5211] 1 Pet. ii. 22.

   [5212] S. John xiv. 30.

   [5213] Phil. ii. 6 sq.

   [5214] Verse 24.

   [5215] Literally, wash a brick (that has not been burnt). Hence (1)
   labour in vain, or (2) make bad worse. The latter appears to be the
   meaning here.

   [5216] Virg. Georg., iv.

   [5217] Rom. xvi. 18.

   [5218] Gal. iv. 16.

   [5219] Prov. xx. 24.

   [5220] Jer. x. 23.

   [5221] S. John xx. 11.

   [5222] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

   [5223] S. John vi. 38.

   [5224] S. Luke xxii. 42.

   [5225] S. Matt. vi. 10.

   [5226] Ps. civ. 35.

   [5227] Is. i. 28.

   [5228] Ps. xxxii. 10.

   [5229] Heb. xii. 6.

   [5230] Verse 5. Sept.

   [5231] S. John v. 28, 29.

   [5232] Rom. ii. 12.

   [5233] The reference is to the stature of Pelagius.

   [5234] The sense of this passage is much disputed. St. Jerome was,
   possibly, speaking of persons who upon the whole are sincere and not
   merely covenanted Christians.

   [5235] Jerome seems here to speak in his own person and to address
   Pelagius directly.

   [5236] Cornuta fronte. Literally, "with horned brow." The allusion is
   to the rays of light which beamed from the face of Moses, the Hebrew
   word bearing both meanings, ray and horn. Hence the portraiture of him
   with horns.

   [5237] Deut. xxii. 4.

   [5238] Rom. xii. 20.

   [5239] S. Matt. iii. 2.

   [5240] iv. 17.

   [5241] iv. 23.

   [5242] x. 7.

   [5243] A Christian of Carthage who, together with Cyprian, sent relief
   to the bishops and martyrs in the Mines of Sigus, in Numidia, and
   elsewhere (a.d. 257).

   [5244] Job xiv. 4.

   [5245] Ps. li. 5.

   [5246] 1 John i. 8.

   [5247] Ps. xix. 12, 13.

   [5248] S. Matt. v. 28.

   [5249] Numb. xxxv. 6.

   [5250] Ezek. xviii. 23.

   [5251] iii. 21.

   [5252] Eccles. vii. 16.

   [5253] Rom. xi. 33, 34.

   [5254] 2 Tim. ii. 23.

   [5255] Eccles. vii. 24, 25.

   [5256] Rom. ix. 20.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book II.

   This book can hardly be said to form part of a dialogue. It is rather
   an argument from Scripture to prove the point of the Augustinian
   arguer, Atticus. From the fourth chapter onwards it consists, like the
   last five chapters of Book I., of a chain of Scripture texts, taken
   from the New Testament and the Prophets, to show the universality of
   sin, and thus to refute the Pelagian assertion that a man can be
   without sin if he wills. We shall, therefore, give, as in the previous
   case, a list of the texts and the first words of them, only giving
   Jerome's words where he introduces some original remark of his own, or
   some noteworthy comment.

   The Pelagian begins by reiterating the dilemma: If the commandments are
   given to be obeyed, then man can be without sin; if he is, by his
   creation, such that he must be a sinner, then God, not he, is the
   author of sin. To the argument that sacrifices are enjoined for sins of
   ignorance, he replies by appealing from the Old Testament to the New,
   which leads to a discussion (2, 3) on St. Paul's description of the
   conflict with sin, in Romans vii. Paul, it is argued, speaks not as a
   sinner, but as a man, and thus confesses the sinfulness of humanity.
   That men may be without ingrained vice is possible; that they can be
   without sin is not. This leads the Augustinian, Atticus, resuming his
   list of testimonies, to the fact that, though men are found who are
   righteous as avoiding wickedness (kakia), yet none is without sin
   (anamartetos ).

   In Psalm xxxii. 5. One who speaks of himself as "holy," yet confesses
   his transgression.

   Prov. xxiv. 16. Explains this, "The righteous falls, but sins again."

   xviii. 17, LXX. and Vulgate. A righteous man accuses himself when he
   begins to speak.

   Ps. lviii. 3. Sinners are estranged from the womb; that is, either, as
   St. Paul says (Rom. v. 14), they sin "after the similitude of Adam";
   or, "when Christ, as the firstborn, opened the virgin's womb" (Exod.
   xiii. 2). The heretics refused to acknowledge the mystery, which was
   prefigured by the Eastern door of the Temple (Ezek. xliv. 2), which
   closed again when once the High Priest had gone through it. [5257]

   Job iv. 17-21. Shall mortal man be just with God?

   vii. 1. The life of man is temptation.

   20, 21. If I have sinned, what can I do?

   ix. 15, 16. If I were righteous, he would not hear me.

   29-31. If I wash myself with snow water, etc.

   x. 15. If I be righteous, etc.

   xiv. 4, 5. Who will be free from uncleanliness? Not one.

   Prov. xvi. 26, LXX. Man toileth in sorrow.

   Job xl. 4. What shall I answer thee?

   Prov. xx. 9. "Who will boast that he has a clean heart?" which shows at
   least that the commandments are not easy, as Pelagius says they are.

   1 John v. 3. "His commandments are not grievous," and

   Matt. xi. 30. "My yoke is easy," are true only in comparison with
   Judaism, and should be compared with

   Acts xv. 10. A yoke ...which neither our fathers nor we are able to
   bear.

   James iv. 11. "Thou judgest the law," that is, if you say that the
   condemnation of sins of ignorance is unreasonable. That we all sin in
   such ways is evident from

   James i. 20. "The wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God."
   But anger is constantly condemned as in

   Prov. xv. 1, LXX. "Wrath destroys even wise men."

   Eph. iv. 26. Let not the sun go down upon your wrath.

   Matt. v. 22. He who is angry...shall be in danger of council.

   Eccles. xi. 19. "I am the most foolish of all men." This is said by
   Christ in the person of humanity. So

   Ps. lxix. 5. "God, Thou knowest my foolishness." But

   1 Cor. i. 25. The foolishness of God is wiser than men.

   Ecclus. i. 18. "In much wisdom is much grief," shows the wise man's
   sense of imperfection. So

   viii. 7. "I hated my life," and

   14. "There be righteous men unto whom it happeneth according to the
   work of the wicked;" that is, God sees evil where we do not.

   17. "However much a man may labor, yet he shall not find it;" and

   ix. 2, 3. There is one event to all. The heart...is full of evil.

   x. 1. "Dead flies cause the ointment to stink;" That is, almost
   everyone is defiled by heresy or other faults.

   1 Pet. ii. 17, 18. Judgement must begin at the house of God.

   6. There are four emotions which agitate mankind, two relating to the
   present, two to the future; two to good, and two to evil. There is
   sorrow, called in Greek lupe, and joy, in Greek chara or hedone,
   although many translate the latter word by voluptas, pleasure; the one
   of which is referred to evil, the other to good. And we go too far if
   we rejoice over such things as we ought not, as, for example, riches,
   power, distinctions, the bad fortune of enemies, or their death; or, on
   the other hand, if we are tortured with grief on account of present
   evils, adversity, exile, poverty, weakness, and the death of kindred,
   all of which is forbidden by the Apostle. And again, if we covet those
   things which we consider good, inheritance, distinctions, unvaried
   prosperity, bodily health, and the like, in the possession of which we
   rejoice and find enjoyment; or if we fear those things which we deem
   adverse. Now, according to the Stoics, Zeno that is to say and
   Chrysippus, it is possible for a perfect man to be free from these
   emotions; according to the Peripatetics, it is difficult and even
   impossible, an opinion which has the constant support of all Scripture.
   Hence Josephus, the historian of the Maccabees, said that the emotions
   can be subdued and governed, not extirpated, and Cicero's five books of
   "Tusculan Disputations" are full of these discussions. [5258] According
   to the Apostle, the weakness of the body and spiritual hosts of
   wickedness in the heavenly places fight against us. And the same writer
   [5259] tells us that the works of the flesh and the works of the spirit
   are manifest, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that we
   do not the things that we would. If we do not what we would, but what
   we would not, how can you say that a man can be without sin if he
   chooses? You see that neither an Apostle, nor any believer can perform
   what he wishes. [5260] "Love covereth a multitude of sins," not so much
   sins of the past as sins of the present, that we may not sin any more
   while the love of God abideth in us. Wherefore it is said concerning
   the woman that was a sinner, [5261] "Her sins which are many are
   forgiven her, for she loved much." And this shows us that the doing
   what we wish does not depend merely upon our own power, but upon the
   assistance which God in His mercy gives to our will.

   7. The quotations from Scripture are now continued:

   In 1 John i. 5, John i. 7, 8, Matt. v. 14, Christ and the Apostles are
   called the Light of the world. The world therefore is darkness.

   1 Tim. vi. 16. God only hath immortality and is "only wise"; yet
   others, like the Prince of Tyre (Ezek. xxviii. 3), are wise
   derivatively. So we are pure, but only by grace. Thus

   1 John i. 7. The blood of Christ cleanses us.

   Job xxv. 5, 6. The stars are not pure in his sight.

   Gal. ii. 16. "By the law no flesh shall be justified;" but

   Rom. iii. 1, 24, 28, 30. Being justified freely through His grace, etc.

   vi. 14. Not under the law, but under grace.

   ix. 16. Not of him that willeth, but of God which showeth mercy.

   ix. 30-32. The Gentiles...attained to the righteousness by faith.

   x. 2. Christ is the end of the law to every one that believeth.

   8. The Apostle confesses his need of this grace for his work.

   1 Cor. i. 1-3. Grace to you from God.

   7, 8. That ye come behind in no gift--that no flesh may glory in His
   sight.

   1 Cor. iii. 6-10. Paul planted...but God gave the increase.

   18, 19. If any man thinketh himself to be wise, let him become a fool.

   iv. 4. I know nothing against myself, yet I am not hereby justified.

   7. What have ye that ye did not receive?

   19. I will come to you, if the Lord will.

   9. The Apostle shows also his need of grace himself.

   1 Cor. xv. 9, 10. By the grace of God I am what I am, etc.

   2 Cor. iii. 4-6. Our sufficiency is of God.

   Gal. ii. 16. We have believed, that we might, be justified by faith.

   ii. 21. If righteousness come by the law, Christ is dead for nought.

   iii. 10, 13. Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law.

   24. The law our teacher to bring us to Christ.

   v. 4. Ye are severed from Christ, ye that would be justified by the
   law.

   10.

   Phil. ii. 13. It is God that worketh in you.

   2 Thess. iii. 3. The Lord is faithful, He shall establish you.

   1 Tim. vi. 20, 21. O Timothy, guard that which is committed unto thee.

   Tit. iii. 4-7. The kindness and mercy of God our Saviour saved us.

   11. We now turn to the Gospels "and supplement the flickering flame of
   the Apostolic light with the brightness of the lamp of Christ."

   Matt. v. 22. "Every man who is angry...shall be in danger of the
   council." Which of us is not here condemned?

   23, 24. "First be reconciled to thy brother." Who is there that finds
   this command easy?

   37. "Let your speech be Yea, yea, Nay, nay." Who has ever kept this
   commandment? The Psalmist says Ps. cxvi. 11. All men are liars.

   12.

   Matt. vi. 34. "Be not anxious for to-morrow." Do you fulfil this?

   vii. 14. "Narrow is the gate which leadeth to life." How can you say
   that the commandments are easy?

   Luke ix. 58. "The Son of Man hath not where to lay His head." This is
   interpreted by

   Is. xxviii. 12. "Receive him that is weary, and this is my rest;" and

   Is. lxvi. 1, 2. "On whom shall I rest but on him that is humble?"
   Christ finds few on whom to rest. How then can His commands be said to
   be easy?

   Matt. ix. 12, 13. "I came not to call the righteous." "They that are
   whole need not the physician." Had the world not been full of sin,
   Christ would not have come. So

   Ps. xii. 1. Help, Lord, for the godly man ceaseth.

   xiv. 1, 3. They are corrupt...none doeth good.

   Matt. x. 9. "Get you no gold...nor shoes." Who has fulfilled this? Not
   even the Apostles, for

   Acts xii. 8. The angel bids Peter to bind on his sandals.

   13.

   Matt. x. 22-34. Describes the persecutions of Christ's followers, and
   gives the command to take up the cross. Are these easy?

   xiv. 31. Even Peter's faith fails, and he begins to sink.

   xv. 19, 20. Out of the heart came evil thoughts, etc.

   xvi. 25. Whosoever will lose his life will find it.

   xviii. 7. "Woe to the man through whom stumbling cometh." But

   James iii. 2. In many things we all stumble or err.

   Phil. ii. 21. All seek their own.

   Matt. xix. 21. The young lawyer had kept all the law, yet failed.

   xxiii. 26-28. The woes on the Pharisees fall in their measure upon all.

   14.

   Matt. xxvi. 39. "Not as I will, but as Thou wilt." Yet Critobulus says,
   by his own will he can do right.

   Mark xiv. 37. "Could ye not watch with me one hour?" They could not.

   vi. 5. He could do no mighty works because of their unbelief.

   vii. 24. "He went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon." If Christ could
   not do as he wished, how can we?

   ix. 5. Peter's request at the Transfiguration shows his ignorance.

   xiii. 32. Even the Son knows not all things; how then can we?

   xiv. 35. If it be possible. How can you say it is possible every hour
   to avoid sin?

   15.

   Mark xvi. 14. Even the Apostles showed unbelief and hardness of heart.

   1 John v. 19. The world lieth in the evil one.

   Luke i. 20. Even Zacharias disbelieved God's message.

   Matt. xvii. 15. The disciples could not relieve the lunatic, because of
   unbelief.

   Mark iv. 34. The disciple's dispute about precedence.

   Luke ix. 54. James and John show a vindictive spirit.

   xiv. 26, 27. The commands to forsake all and take up the cross are not
   easy.

   xvi. 15. That which is exalted among men is abomination in the sight of
   God.

   xvii. 1. It is impossible but that occasions of stumbling should come.

   xvii. 6. The Apostles' faith was not even like a grain of mustard seed.

   James iii. 2.

   Matt. xvii. 19.

   16.

   Luke xviii. 1. We are always to pray. This shows our weakness.

   27. Who, then, can be saved? It is possible, but to God only.

   xxii. 24. The contest for precedence at the last supper.

   31, 32. Peter's faith almost overcome by Satan.

   Luke xxii. 43. Even Christ in his agony needs an angel to strengthen
   Him.

   46. Pray that ye enter not into temptation.

   17.

   John v. 30. Even Christ says, "I cannot do anything by myself"; and

   vii. 10. Was irresolute about going up to the Feast of Tabernacles.

   19. None of you doeth the law.

   viii. 3. None of the accusers of the woman taken in adultery were
   without sin. Christ wrote their names in the earth (Jerem. xvii. 13).

   x. 8. All who came (not who were sent; Jerem. xiv. 15) before Christ
   were robbers.

   xvii. 12. I kept them--they did not keep themselves.

   Acts xv. 39. Paul and Barnabas quarrelled.

   xvi. 6, 7. They were forbidden to preach where they chose.

   18. Even the Apostles, with their full light, show their dependence on
   grace.

   Acts xvii. 30. The times before Christ were times of ignorance.

   1 Cor. iv. 19. I will come if the Lord will.

   James ii. 10. To stumble in one point is to be guilty of all.

   iii. 2. In many things we all stumble.

   8. The tongue is a deadly poison.

   19.

   James iv. 1. Wars arise from our lust. David indeed said,

   Ps. xxvi. 2. "Examine me and prove me," etc. This self-confidence led
   to his fall.

   li. 1. Have mercy on me, O God.

   lxxx. 5. "Thou feedest us with the bread of tears." Similarly

   Ps. xxx. 6, 7. I said I shall never be moved...Thou didst hide Thy
   face.

   xxxii. 5. I said I will confess my sin,

   xxxvii. 5, 6. He shall make thy righteousness as the light.

   39. The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord.

   xxxviii. 7. There is no soundness in my flesh.

   Rom. vii. 18. In my flesh dwelleth no good thing.

   Ps. xxxviii. 8. Vulgate. My loins are filled with deceits.

   xxxix. 5. He hath made our days as handbreadths.

   lxix. 5. My sins are not hid from thee.

   lxxvii. 2. My soul refused to be comforted.

   10. This is the changing of the right hand of the Most High. [5262]

   20.

   Ps. lxxxix. 2. Mercy shall be built up forever.

   xci. 6. From "the thing [5263] that walketh in darkness" who can be
   free? For

   xi. 2. "The wicked bend their bow"--an image of the heretics.

   xcii. 14. Those that are planted in the house of the Lord shall
   flourish.

   ciii. 8, 10. The Lord is full of compassion.

   2 Sam. viii. 13, 14. David receives the promises with the humble
   confession of his weakness. "Is this the law of man, O God?"

   xvi. 10. He humbles himself under Abishai's violence and Shimei's
   curse.

   xvii. 14. And is delivered only by God's confounding the counsel of
   Ahithophel.

   1 Kings xiv. 8. It was God who gave Jeroboam the kingdom.

   21.

   1 Kings xv. 11. Asa, though a good man, was faulty.

   xix. 4. Elijah fled from Jezebel.

   Ps. cxviii. 6. The Lord is my keeper.

   2 Chron. xvii. 3. Jehoshaphat prospers because the Lord is with him.
   Yet

   xix. 2. He is rebuked for joining with Ahab.

   2 Chron. xxii. 9. Ahaziah received burial among kings because descended
   from righteous Jehoshaphat.

   2 Kings xviii. 3, 4, 7. Hezekiah did great things, but only through the
   Lord's help.

   14. He gave the consecrated gold to the king of Assyria.

   22. Even the best kings of Judah were imperfect.

   2 Kings xx. 1, 5. Hezekiah wept when death was at hand, and recovered
   through special mercy.

   13, 17. But he sinned in receiving the Babylonian envoys.

   2 Chron. xxxii. 26. He fell by the lifting up of his heart.

   xxxiv. 2. Josiah was a righteous man; yet

   22, 23. He needed the aid of Huldah; and

   xxxv. 22. He was slain through not heeding God's warning; and

   23. The prophets also are weak and sinful.

   Lam. iv. 20. Jeremiah [5264] lamented his fall.

   Numb. xx. 10, 12. Moses is punished for his sin at Meribah. This is the
   meaning of Ps. cxli. 6. Vulgate. Their judges were swallowed up, joined
   to the Rock, etc.

   Hosea ii. 19. God in mercy forgives Israel's unfaithfulness.

   xi. 9. "I will not enter into the city." Only the Holy One is not
   joined to the mass of ungodliness.

   Amos vi. 13. We turn righteousness into wormwood.

   Jonah i. 14. The sailors confess that God is just in raising the storm.

   Micah vii. 2. The godly man is perished from the earth, etc.

   vi. 8. The command of justice, mercy, and a humble walk with God is
   only possible to humble faith, for

   Ps. cxl. 6. "The wicked walk on every side," and

   James iv. 6. God giveth grace to the humble.

   24.

   Habakkuk iii. 16. Let rottenness enter into my bones, if only I may
   rest, etc.

   Zech. iii. 1. Joshua is represented as clothed in filthy garments, and
   is freed through God's mercy.

   But Jovinian's heir says "I am quite free from sin, I have no filthy
   garments, I am governed by my own will, I am greater than an Apostle.
   The Apostle does what he would not, and what he would he does not; but
   I do what I will, and what I would not I do not: the kingdom of heaven
   has been prepared for me, or rather I have by my virtuous life prepared
   it for myself. Adam was subject to punishment, and so are others who
   think themselves guilty after the similitude of Adam's transgressions;
   I and my crew alone have nothing to fear. Other men shut up in their
   cells and who never see women, because, poor creatures! they do not
   listen to my words, are tormented with desire: crowds of women may
   surround me, I feel no stirring of concupiscence. For to me may be
   applied the [5265] words, Holy stones are rolled upon the ground,' and
   the reason why I am insensible to the attraction of sin is that in the
   power of free will I carry Christ's trophy about with me." But let us
   listen to God [5266] proclaiming by the mouth of Isaiah: "O my people,
   they which call thee happy cause thee to err, and destroy the way of
   thy paths." Who is the greatest subverter of the people of God--he who,
   relying on the power of free choice, despises the help of the Creator,
   and is satisfied with following his own will, or he who dreads to be
   judged by the details of the Lord's commandments? To men of this sort,
   God [5267] says, "Woe unto you that are wise in your own eyes, and
   prudent in your own sight." Isaiah, if we follow the Hebrew, laments
   [5268] and says, "Woe is me because I have been silent, because I am a
   man of unclean lips: and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean
   lips, for mine eyes have seen the Lord of Hosts." He for his
   meritorious and virtuous life enjoyed the sight of God, and conscious
   of his sins confessed that he had unclean lips. Not that he had said
   anything repugnant to the will of God, but because, either from fear,
   or from a deep sense of shame, he had been [5269] silent, and had not
   reproved the errors of the people so freely as a prophet should. When
   do we sinners rebuke offenders, we who flatter wealth and accept the
   persons of sinners for the sake of filthy lucre? for we shall hardly
   say that we speak with perfect frankness to men of whose assistance we
   stand in need. Suppose that we do not such things as they, suppose we
   keep ourselves from every form of sin; to refrain from speaking the
   truth is certainly sin. In the Septuagint, however, we do not find the
   words "because I have been silent," but "because I was pricked," that
   is with the consciousness of sin; and thus the words of the [5270]
   prophet are fulfilled. "My life was turned into misery while I was
   pierced by the thorn." He was pricked by the thorn of sin: you are
   decked with the flowers of virtue. [5271] "The moon shall be ashamed,
   and the sun confounded, when the Lord shall punish the host of heaven
   on high." This is explained by another passage. [5272] "Even the stars
   are unclean in His sight," and again, [5273] "He chargeth His angels
   with folly." The moon is ashamed, the sun is confounded, and the sky
   covered with sackcloth, and shall we fearlessly and joyously, as though
   we were free from all sin, face the majesty of the Judge, when the
   mountains shall melt away, that is, all who are lifted up by pride, and
   all the host of the heavens, whether they be stars, or angelic powers,
   when the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll, and all their
   host shall fade away like leaves?

   The argument is now carried on mostly by the quotation of passages from
   the prophets:

   25.

   Is. xxxiv. 5. "My sword hath drunk its fill in the heavens. It will
   come down in Edom." How much more is there wrath against sin on earth!
   Edom means blood, which cannot inherit the kingdom (1 Cor. xv. 50).

   xlv. 9. Woe unto him who striveth with his Maker.

   liii. 6. We have all gone astray like sheep.

   Ezek. xvi. 14. Jerusalem is perfect in beauty; yet

   Ezek. xvi. 60, 61. Her salvation is not of merit but of mercy.

   Nahum i. 3. Though he cleanse, [5274] yet will he not make thee
   innocent.

   1 Cor. xv. 9. I am not worthy--because I persecuted.

   Ezek. xx. 43, 44. When pardoned, Jerusalem will still remember her sin.

   Let us confess with shame that these are the utterances of men who have
   already won their reward; sinners upon earth, and still in our frail
   and mortal bodies let us adopt the language of the saints in heaven who
   have even been endowed with incorruption and immortality. [5275] "And
   ye say the way of the Lord is not equal, when your ways are not equal."
   It is Pharisaic pride to attribute to the injustice of the Creator sins
   which are due to our own will, and to slander His righteousness. The
   sons of Zadok, the priests of the spiritual temple, that is the Church,
   [5276] go not out to the people in their ministerial robes, lest by
   human intercourse they may lose their holiness and be defiled. And do
   you suppose that you, in the thick of the throng, and an ordinary
   individual, are pure?

   26. Let us hastily run through the prophet Jeremiah:

   Jerem. v. 1, 2. Is there any that doeth justly, etc.

   vii. 21, 22. God rejects the sacrifices, because of the worshippers'
   evil lives.

   xiii. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin?

   27.

   Jerem. xvii. 14. "Heal me, O Lord." Otherwise Jeremiah could only say,
   as in the text next quoted,

   xx. 14, 17, 18. Cursed be the day wherein I was born, etc.

   xxiii. 23. Am I a God at hand, etc. So conscious is he of God's power.

   xxiv. 6, 7. God, not they themselves, will plant them, etc.

   xxvi. 21-24. Jeremiah needed the help of Ahikam. How much more do we
   need that of God.

   28.

   Jerem. xxxi. 34. The promise of the new covenant.

   xxxii. 30. The children of Israel have perpetually done evil.

   xxxvii. 18, 19. Yet Jeremiah himself trembled before Zedekiah.

   Jerem. xxx. 10, 11. Fear not, O Jacob, for I am with thee.

   29.

   Amos vi. 14. "We have taken us horns by our own strength." These are
   the boasts of heretics. But

   Is. xvi. 6. His strength (Moab's) is by no means according to his
   arrogance. [5277]

   Jerem. i. 7, 20. Men's sin will only be abolished because God is
   gracious to them. If you will abandon your assertions of natural
   ability, I will concede that your whole contention stands good, but
   only by the gift of God.

   Lam. iii. 26-42. It is good that a man should quietly wait for the
   salvation of the Lord.

   30.

   Dan. iv. 17. The Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men.

   Ps. cxiii. 7, 8. He raiseth up the poor out of the dust.

   Is. xl. 17. He doeth what He will in heaven and in earth.

   The words of 2 Maccabees v. 17, which say that Antiochus Epiphanes had
   power to overthrow the Temple, "because of the multitude of sins," are
   quoted in connection with the confessions of Daniel.

   Dan. ix. 5. "We have sinned and dealt perversely," which is shown by

   20. "While I was yet praying," etc., to be a personal, not only a
   national confession.

   24. The prophecy of the seventy weeks shows that the prophet looked to
   God alone for the establishment of righteousness.

   So then, until that end shall come, and this corruptible and mortal
   shall put on incorruption and immortality, we must be liable to sin;
   not, as you falsely say, owing to the fault of our nature and creation,
   but through the frailty and fickleness of human will, which varies from
   moment to moment; because God alone changeth not. You ask in what
   respects Abel, Enoch, Joshua the son of Nun, or Elisha, and the rest of
   the saints have sinned. There is no need to look for a knot in a
   bulrush; I freely confess I do not know; and I only wish that, when
   sins are manifest, I might still be silent. [5278] "I know nothing
   against myself," says St. Paul, "yet am I not hereby justified." [5279]
   "Man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the
   heart." Before Him no man is justified. And so Paul says confidently,
   [5280] "All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God"; and
   [5281] "God hath shut up all under sin that He may have mercy upon
   all"; and similarly in other passages which we have repeated again and
   again.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5257] There was an early and widespread belief, afterwards confirmed
   by a decree of the Council of Ephesus, that the birth of Christ was by
   miracle, not by a true and proper parturition.

   [5258] Eph. vi. 12.

   [5259] Gal. v. 19.

   [5260] 1 Pet. iv. 8.

   [5261] Luke vii. 47.

   [5262] Vulgate, Rev. V. I will remember the years, etc. Marg.--The
   right hand of the Most High doth change.

   [5263] LXX. A.V. Pestilence.

   [5264] The words of the Lamentations refer to Zedekiah.

   [5265] Zech. ix. 16, Sept. Correctly, they (God's people) shall be as
   the stones of a crown lifting themselves up (or glittering) upon His
   land.

   [5266] Is. iii. 12.

   [5267] v. 21.

   [5268] vi. 5.

   [5269] That is, according to Jerome's rendering of the Hebrew. R.V. has
   "I am undone." For the Sept. rendering see below.

   [5270] Ps. xxxii. 4.

   [5271] Is. xxiv. 21.

   [5272] Job xxv. 5.

   [5273] Job iv. 18.

   [5274] Mundans: not in the Vulgate nor in A.V.

   [5275] Ezek. xxxii. 17.

   [5276] Ibid. xliv. 15, 16.

   [5277] This is the sense of the Vulgate, but not the exact words.

   [5278] 1 Cor. iv. 4.

   [5279] 1 Sam. xvi. 7.

   [5280] Rom. iii. 23.

   [5281] Gal. iii. 22.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book III.

   1. Critob. I am charmed with the exuberance of your eloquence, but at
   the same time I would remind you that, [5282] "In the multitude of
   words there wanteth not transgression." And how does it bear upon the
   question before us? You will surely admit that those who have received
   Christian baptism are without sin. And that being free from sin they
   are righteous. And that once they are righteous, they can, if they take
   care, preserve their righteousness, and so through life avoid all sin.

   Attic. Do you not blush to follow the opinion of Jovinian, which has
   been exploded and condemned? For he relies upon just the same proofs
   and arguments as you do; nay, rather, you are all eagerness for his
   inventions, and desire to preach in the East what was formerly [5283]
   condemned at Rome, and not long ago in [5284] Africa. Read then the
   reply which was given to him, and you will there find the answer to
   yourself. For in the discussion of doctrines and disputed points, we
   must have regard not to persons but to things. And yet let me tell you
   that baptism condones past offences, and does not preserve
   righteousness in the time to come; the keeping of that is dependent on
   toil and industry, as well as earnestness, and above all on the mercy
   of God. It is ours to ask, to Him it belongs to bestow what we ask;
   ours to begin, His it is to finish; ours to offer what we can, His to
   fulfil what we cannot perform. [5285] "For except the Lord build the
   house, they labour in vain that build it. Except the Lord keep the
   city, the watchman waketh but in vain." Wherefore the Apostle [5286]
   bids us so run that we may attain. All indeed run, but one receiveth
   the crown. And in the [5287] Psalm it is written, "O Lord, thou hast
   crowned us with thy favour as with a shield." For our victory is won
   and the crown of our victory is gained by His protection and through
   His shield; and here we run that hereafter we may attain; there he
   shall receive the crown who in this world has proved the conqueror. And
   when we have been baptized we are told, [5288] "Behold thou art made
   whole; sin no more lest a worse thing happen unto thee." And again,
   [5289] "Know ye not that ye are a temple of God, and that the Spirit of
   God dwelleth in you? If any man profane the temple of God, him shall
   God destroy." And in another place, [5290] "The Lord is with you so
   long as ye are with Him: if ye forsake Him, He will also forsake you."
   Where is the man, do you suppose, in whom as in a shrine and sanctuary
   the purity of Christ is permanent, and in whose case the serenity of
   the temple is saddened by no cloud of sin? We cannot always have the
   same countenance, though the philosophers falsely boast that this was
   the experience of Socrates; how much less can our minds be always the
   same! As men have many expressions of countenance, so also do the
   feelings of their hearts vary. If it were possible for us to be always
   immersed in the waters of baptism, sins would fly over our heads and
   leave us untouched. The Holy Spirit would protect us. But the enemy
   assails us, and when conquered does not depart, but is ever lying in
   ambush, that he may secretly shoot the upright in heart.

   2. In the Gospel according to the Hebrews, which is written in the
   Chaldee and Syrian language, but in Hebrew characters, and is used by
   the Nazarenes to this day (I mean the Gospel according to the Apostles,
   or, as is generally maintained, the Gospel according to Matthew, a copy
   of which is in the library at Cæsarea), we find, "Behold, the mother of
   our Lord and His brethren said to Him, John Baptist baptizes for the
   remission of sins; let us go and be baptized by him. But He said to
   them, what sin have I committed that I should go and be baptized by
   him? Unless, haply, the very words which I have said are only
   ignorance." And in the same volume, "If thy brother sin against thee in
   word, and make amends to thee, receive him seven times in a day."
   Simon, His disciple, said to Him, "Seven times in a day?" The Lord
   answered and said to him, "I say unto thee until seventy times seven."
   Even the prophets, after they were anointed with the Holy Spirit, were
   guilty of sinful words. Ignatius, an apostolic man and a martyr, boldly
   writes, [5291] "The Lord chose Apostles who were sinners above all
   men." It is of their speedy conversion that the Psalmist sings, [5292]
   "Their infirmities were multiplied; afterwards they made haste." If you
   do not allow the authority of this evidence, at least admit its
   antiquity, and see what has been the opinion of all good churchmen.
   Suppose a person who has been baptized to have been carried off by
   death either immediately, or on the very day of his baptism, and I will
   generously concede that he neither thought nor said anything whereby,
   through error and ignorance, he fell into sin. Does it follow that he
   will, therefore, be without sin, because he appears not to have
   overcome, but to have avoided sin? Is not the true reason rather that
   by the mercy of God he was released from the prison of sins and
   departed to the Lord? We also say this, that God can do what He wills;
   and that man of himself and by his own will cannot, as you maintain, be
   without sin. If he can, it is idle for you now to add the word grace,
   for, with such a power, he has no need of it. If, however, he cannot
   avoid sin without the grace of God, it is folly for you to attribute to
   him an ability which he does not possess. For whatever depends upon
   another's will, is not in the power of him whose ability you assert,
   but of him whose aid is clearly indispensable.

   3. C. What do you mean by this perversity, or, rather, senseless
   contention? Will you not grant me even so much--that when a man leaves
   the waters of baptism he is free from sin?

   A. Either I fail to express my meaning clearly, or you are slow of
   apprehension.

   C. How so?

   A. Remember both what you maintained and also what I say. You argued
   that a man can be free from sin if he chooses. I reply that it is an
   impossibility; not that we are to think that a man is not free from sin
   immediately after baptism, but that that time of sinlessness is by no
   means to be referred to human ability, but to the grace of God. Do not,
   therefore, claim the power for man, and I will admit the fact. For how
   can a man be able who is not able of himself? Or what is that
   sinlessness which is conditioned by the immediate death of the body?
   Should the man's life be prolonged, he will certainly be liable to sins
   and to ignorance.

   C. Your logic stops my mouth. You do not speak with Christian
   simplicity, but entangle me in some fine distinctions between being and
   ability to be.

   A. Is it I who play these tricks with words? The article came from your
   own workshop. For you say, not that a man is free from sin, but that he
   is able to be; I, on the other hand, will grant what you deny, that a
   man is free from sin by the grace of God, and yet will maintain that he
   is not able of himself.

   C. It is useless to give commandments if we cannot keep them.

   A. No one doubts that God commanded things possible. But because men do
   not what they might, therefore the whole world is subject to the
   judgment of God, and needs His mercy. On the other hand, if you can
   produce a man who has fulfilled the whole law, you will certainly be
   able to show that there is a man who does not need the mercy of God.
   For everything which can happen must either take place in the past, the
   present, or the future. As to your assertion that a man can be without
   sin if he chooses, show that it has happened in the past, or at all
   events that it does happen at the present day; the future will reveal
   itself. If, however, you can point to no one who either is, or has
   been, altogether free from sin, it remains for us to confine our
   discussion to the future. Meanwhile, you are vanquished and a captive
   as regards two out of three periods of time, the past and the present.
   If anyone hereafter shall be greater than patriarchs, prophets,
   apostles, inasmuch as he is without sin, then you may perhaps be able
   to convince future generations as to their time.

   4. C. Talk as you like, argue as you please, you will never wrest from
   me free will, which God bestowed once for all, nor will you be able to
   deprive me of what God has given, the ability if I have the will.

   A. By way of example let us take one proof: [5293] "I have found David,
   the Son of Jesse, a man after Mine own heart, who shall do all My
   will." There is no doubt that David was a holy man, and yet he who was
   chosen that he might do all God's will is blamed for certain actions.
   Of course it was possible for him who was chosen for the purpose to do
   all God's will. Nor is God to blame Who beforehand spoke of his doing
   all His will as commanded, but blame does attach to him who did not
   what was foretold. For God did not say that He had found a man who
   would unfailingly do His bidding and fulfil His will, but only one who
   would do all His will. And we, too, say that a man can avoid sinning,
   if he chooses, according to his local and temporal circumstances and
   physical weakness, so long as his mind is set upon righteousness and
   the string is well stretched upon the lyre. But if a man grow a little
   remiss it is with him as with the boatman pulling against the stream,
   who finds that, if he slackens but for a moment, the craft glides back
   and he is carried by the flowing waters whither he would not. Such is
   the state of man; if we are a little careless we learn our weakness,
   and find that our power is limited. Do you suppose that the Apostle
   Paul, when he wrote [5294] "the coat (or cloak) that I left at Troas
   with Carpus, bring when thou comest, and the books, especially the
   parchments," was thinking of heavenly mysteries, and not of those
   things which are required for daily life and to satisfy our bodily
   necessities? Find me a man who is never hungry, thirsty, or cold, who
   knows nothing of pain, or fever, or the torture of strangury, and I
   will grant you that a man can think of nothing but virtue. When the
   Apostle was [5295] struck by the servant, he delivered himself thus
   against the High Priest who commanded the blow to be given: "God shall
   strike thee, thou whited wall." We miss the patience of the Saviour Who
   was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and opened not His mouth, but
   mercifully said to the smiter, [5296] "If I have spoken evil, bear
   witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou Me?" We do not
   disparage the Apostle, but declare the glory of God Who suffered in the
   flesh and overcame the evil inflicted on the flesh and the weakness of
   the flesh--to say nothing of what the Apostle says elsewhere: [5297]
   "Alexander, the coppersmith, did me much evil; the Lord, the righteous
   Judge, will recompense him in that day."

   5. C. I have been longing to say something, but have checked the words
   as they were bursting from my lips. You compel me to say it.

   A. Who hinders you from saying what you think? Either what you are
   going to say is good--and you ought not to deprive us of what is
   good--or it is bad, and, therefore, it is not regard for us, but shame
   that keeps you silent.

   C. I will say, I will say after all, what I think. Your whole argument
   tends to this: You accuse nature, and blame God for creating man such
   as he is.

   A. Is this what you wished, and yet did not wish, to say? Pray speak
   out, so that all may have the benefit of your wisdom. Are you censuring
   God because he made man to be man? Let the angels also complain because
   they are angels. Let every creature discuss the question, Why it is as
   it was created? and not what the Creator could have made it. I must now
   amuse myself with the rhetorical exercises of childhood, and passing
   from the gnat and the ant to cherubim and seraphim, inquire why each
   was not created with a happier lot. And when I reach the exalted
   powers, I will argue the point: Why God alone is only God, and did not
   make all things gods? For, according to you, He will either be unable
   to do so, or will be guilty of envy. Censure Him, and demand why He
   allows the devil to be in this world, and carry off the crown when you
   have won the victory.

   C. I am not so senseless as to complain of the existence of the devil,
   through whose malice death entered into the world; but what grieves me
   is this: that dignitaries of the Church, and those who usurp the title
   of master, destroy free will; and once that is destroyed, the way is
   open for the Manichæans.

   A. Am I the destroyer of free will because, throughout the discussion,
   my single aim has been to maintain the omnipotence of God as well as
   free will?

   C. How can you have free will, and yet say that man can do nothing
   without God's assistance?

   A. If he is to be blamed who couples free will and God's help, it
   follows that we ought to praise him who does away with God's help.

   C. I am not making God's help unnecessary, for to His grace we owe all
   our ability; but I and those who think with me keep both within their
   own bounds. To God's grace we assign the gift of the power of free
   choice; to our own will, the doing, or the not doing, of a thing; and
   thus rewards and punishments for doing or not doing can be maintained.

   6. A. You seem to me to be lost in forgetfulness, and to be going over
   the lines of argument already traversed as though not a word had been
   previously said. For, by this long discussion, it has been established
   that the Lord, by the same grace wherewith He bestowed upon us free
   choice, assists and supports us in our individual actions.

   C. Why, then, does He crown and praise what He has Himself wrought in
   us?

   A. That is to say, our will which offered all it could, the toil which
   strove in action, and the humility which ever looked to the help of
   God.

   C. So, then, if we have not done what He commanded, either God was
   willing to assist us, or He was not. If He was willing and did assist
   us, and yet we have not done what we wished, then He, and not we, has
   been overcome. But if He would not help, the man is not to be blamed
   who wished to do His will, but God, who was able to help, but would
   not.

   A. Do you not see that your dilemma has landed you in a deep abyss of
   blasphemy? Whichever way you take it, God is either weak or malevolent,
   and He is not so much praised because He is the author of good and
   gives His help, as abused for not restraining evil. Blame Him, then,
   because He allows the existence of the devil, and has suffered, and
   still suffers, evil to be done in the world. This is what Marcion asks,
   and the whole pack of heretics who mutilate the Old Testament, and have
   mostly spun an argument something like this: Either God knew that man,
   placed in Paradise, would transgress His command, or He did not know.
   If He knew, man is not to blame, who could not avoid God's
   foreknowledge, but He Who created him such that he could not escape the
   knowledge of God. If He did not know, in stripping Him of foreknowledge
   you also take away His divinity. Upon the same showing God will be
   deserving of blame for choosing Saul, who was to prove one of the worst
   of kings. And the Saviour must be convicted either of ignorance, or of
   unrighteousness, inasmuch as He said in the Gospel, [5298] "Did I not
   choose you the twelve, and one of you is a devil?" Ask Him why He chose
   Judas, a traitor? Why He entrusted to him the bag when He knew that he
   was a thief? Shall I tell you the reason? God judges the present, not
   the future. He does not make use of His foreknowledge to condemn a man
   though He knows that he will hereafter displease Him; but such is His
   goodness and unspeakable mercy that He chooses a man who, He perceives,
   will meanwhile be good, and who, He knows, will turn out badly, thus
   giving him the opportunity of being converted and of repenting. This is
   the Apostle's meaning when he says, [5299] "Dost thou not know that the
   goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? but after thy hardness and
   impenitent heart treasurest up for thyself wrath in the day of wrath
   and revelation of the righteous judgment of God, Who will render to
   every man according to his works." For Adam did not sin because God
   knew that he would do so; but God inasmuch as He is God, foreknew what
   Adam would do of his own free choice. You may as well accuse God of
   falsehood because He said by the mouth of Jonah: [5300] "Yet three
   days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown." But God will reply by the mouth
   of Jeremiah, [5301] "At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation,
   and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to break down, and to
   destroy it; if that nation, concerning which I have spoken, turn from
   their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.
   And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a
   kingdom, to build and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight, that it
   obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good, wherewith I said I
   would benefit them." Jonah, on a certain occasion, was indignant
   because, at God's command, he had spoken falsely; but his sorrow was
   proved to be ill founded, since he would rather speak truth and have a
   countless multitude perish, than speak falsely and have them saved. His
   position was thus illustrated: [5302] "Thou grievest over the ivy (or
   gourd), for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow,
   which came up in a night, and perished in a night; and should not I
   have pity on Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more than six score
   thousand persons that cannot discern between their right hand and their
   left hand?" If there was so vast a number of children and simple folk,
   whom you will never be able to prove sinners, what shall we say of
   those inhabitants of both sexes who were at different periods of life?
   According to Philo, and the wisest of philosophers, Plato (so the
   "Timæus" tells us), in passing from infancy to decrepit old age, we go
   through seven stages, which so gradually and so gently follow one
   another that we are quite insensible of the change.

   C. The drift of your whole argument is this--what the Greeks call
   autexousion , and we free will, you admit in terms, but in effect
   destroy. For you make God the author of sin, in asserting that man can
   of himself do nothing, but that he must have the help of God to Whom is
   imputed all we do. But we say that, whether a man does good or evil, it
   is imputed to him on account of the faculty of free choice, inasmuch as
   he did what he chose, and not to Him Who once for all gave him free
   choice.

   A. Your shuffling is to no purpose; you are caught in the snares of
   truth. For upon this showing, even if He does not Himself assist,
   according to you He will be the author of evil, because He might have
   prevented it and did not. It is an old maxim that if a man can deliver
   another from death and does not, he is a homicide.

   C. I withdraw and yield the point; you have won; provided, however,
   that victory is the subverting of the truth by specious words, that is
   to say, not by truth, but by falsehood. For I might make answer to you
   in the Apostle's words, [5303] "Though I be rude in speech, yet not in
   knowledge." When you speak, your rhetorical tricks are too much for me,
   and I seem to agree with you; but when you stop speaking, it all goes
   out of my head, and I see quite clearly that your argument does not
   flow from the fountains of truth and Christian simplicity, but rests on
   the laboured subtleties of the philosophers.

   A. Do you wish me, then, once more to resort to the evidence of
   Scripture? If so, what becomes of the boast of your disciples that no
   one can answer your arguments or solve the questions you raise?

   C. I not only wish, but am eager that you should do so. Show me any
   place in Holy Scripture where we find that, the power of free choice
   being lost, a man does what of himself he either would not, or could
   not do.

   8. A. We must use the words of Scripture not as you propose, but as
   truth and reason demand. Jacob says in his prayer, [5304] "If the Lord
   God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will
   give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my
   father's house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone,
   which I have set up for a token, shall be God's house; and of all that
   Thou shalt give me I will surely give the tenth unto Thee." He did not
   say, If thou preserve my free choice, and I gain by my toil food and
   raiment, and return to my father's house. He refers everything to the
   will of God, that he may be found worthy to receive that for which he
   prays. On Jacob's return from Mesopotamia [5305] an army of angels met
   him, who are called God's camp. He afterwards contended with an angel
   in the form of a man, and was strengthened by God; whereupon, instead
   of Jacob, the supplanter, he received the name, the most upright of
   God. For he would not have dared to return to his cruel brother unless
   he had been strengthened and secured by the Lord's help. In the sequel
   we read, [5306] "The sun rose upon him after he passed over Phanuel,"
   which is, being interpreted, the face of God. Hence [5307] Moses also
   says, "I have seen the Lord face to face, and my life is preserved,"
   not by any natural quality--but by the condescension of God, Who had
   mercy. So then the Sun of Righteousness rises upon us when God makes
   His face to shine upon us and gives us strength. Joseph in Egypt was
   shut up in prison, and we next hear that the keeper of the prison,
   believing in his fidelity, committed everything to his hand. And the
   reason is given: [5308] "Because the Lord was with him: and whatsoever
   he did, the Lord made it to prosper." Wherefore, also, dreams were
   suggested to Pharaoh's attendants, and Pharaoh had one which none could
   interpret, that so Joseph might be released, and his father and
   brethren fed, and Egypt saved in the time of famine. Moreover, God
   [5309] said to Israel, in a vision of the night, "I am the God of thy
   fathers; fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will make of thee there
   a great nation, and I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will
   also surely bring thee up again, and Joseph shall put his hand upon
   thine eyes." Where in this passage do we find the power of free choice?
   Is not the whole circumstance that he ventured to go to his son, and
   entrust himself to a nation that knew not the Lord, due to the help of
   the God of his fathers? The people was released from Egypt with a
   strong hand and an outstretched arm; not the hand of Moses and Aaron,
   but of Him who set the people free by signs and wonders, and at last
   smote the firstborn of Egypt, so that they who at [5310] first were
   persistent in keeping the people, eagerly urged them to depart. Solomon
   [5311] says, "Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not upon
   thine own understanding: in all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He shall
   direct thy paths." Understand what He says--that we must not trust in
   our wisdom, but in the Lord alone, by Whom the steps of a man are
   directed. Lastly, we are bidden to show Him our ways, and make them
   known, for they are not made straight by our own labour, but by His
   assistance and mercy. And so it is written, [5312] "Make my way right
   before Thy face," so that what is right to Thee may seem also right to
   me. Solomon says the same-- [5313] "Commit thy works unto the Lord, and
   thy thoughts shall be established." Our thoughts are then established
   when we commit all we do to the Lord our helper, resting it, as it
   were, upon the firm and solid rock, and attribute everything to Him.

   9. The Apostle Paul, rapidly recounting the benefits of God, ended with
   the words, [5314] "And who is sufficient for these things?" Wherefore,
   also, in another place he [5315] says, "Such confidence have we through
   Christ to Godward; not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think
   anything as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God; Who also
   made us sufficient as ministers of a new covenant; not of the letter
   but of the spirit; for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life."
   Do we still dare to pride ourselves on free will, and to abuse the
   benefits of God to the dishonour of the giver? Whereas the same chosen
   vessel openly [5316] writes, "We have this treasure in earthen vessels,
   that the exceeding greatness of the power may be of God, and not from
   ourselves." Therefore, also, in another place, checking the impudence
   of the heretics, he [5317] says, "He that glorieth, let him glory in
   the Lord. For not he that commendeth himself is approved, but whom the
   Lord commendeth." And again, [5318] "In nothing was I behind the very
   chiefest Apostles, though I be nothing." Peter, disturbed by the
   greatness of the miracles he witnessed, said to the Lord, [5319]
   "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man." And the Lord said to His
   disciples, [5320] "I am the vine and ye are the branches: He that
   abideth in Me and I in him, the same beareth much fruit, for apart from
   Me ye can do nothing." Just as the vine branches and shoots immediately
   decay when they are severed from the parent stem, so all the strength
   of men fades and perishes, if it be bereft of the help of God. "No
   one," [5321] He says, "can come unto Me except the Father Who sent Me
   draw him." When He says, "No one can come unto Me," He shatters the
   pride of free will; because, even if a man will to go to Christ, except
   that be realized which follows--"unless My heavenly Father draw
   him"--desire is to no purpose, and effort is in vain. At the same time
   it is to be noted that he who is drawn does not run freely, but is led
   along either because he holds back and is sluggish, or because he is
   reluctant to go.

   10. Now, how can a man who cannot by his own strength and labour come
   to Jesus, at the same time avoid all sins? and avoid them perpetually,
   and claim for himself a name which belongs to the might of God? For if
   He and I are both without sin, what difference is there between me and
   God? One more proof only I will adduce, that I may not weary you and my
   hearers. [5322] Sleep was removed from the eyes of Ahasuerus, whom the
   Seventy call Artaxerxes, that he might turn over the memoirs of his
   faithful ministers and come upon Mordecai, by whose evidence he was
   delivered from a conspiracy; and that thus Esther might be more
   acceptable, and the whole people of the Jews escape imminent death.
   There is no doubt that the mighty sovereign to whom belonged the whole
   East, from India to the North and to Ethiopia, after feasting
   sumptuously on delicacies gathered from every part of the world would
   have desired to sleep, and to take his rest, and to gratify his free
   choice of sleep, had not the Lord, the provider of all good things,
   hindered the course of nature, so that in defiance of nature the
   tyrant's cruelty might be overcome. If I were to attempt to produce all
   the instances in Holy Writ, I should be tedious. All that the saints
   say is a prayer to God; their whole prayer and supplication a strong
   wrestling for the pity of God, so that we, who by our own strength and
   zeal cannot be saved, may be preserved by His mercy. But when we are
   concerned with grace and mercy, free will is in part void; in part, I
   say, for so much as this depends upon it, that we wish and desire, and
   give assent to the course we choose. But it depends on God whether we
   have the power in His strength and with His help to perform what we
   desire, and to bring to effect our toil and effort.

   11. C. I simply said that we find the help of God not in our several
   actions, but in the grace of creation and of the law, that free will
   might not be destroyed. But there are many of us who maintain that all
   we do is done with the help of God.

   A. Whoever says that must leave your party. Either, then, say the same
   yourself and join our side, or, if you refuse, you will be just as much
   our enemy as those who do not hold our views.

   C. I shall be on your side if you speak my sentiments, or rather you
   will be on mine if you do not contradict them. You admit health of
   body, and deny health of the soul, which is stronger than the body. For
   sin is to the soul what disease or a wound is to the body. If then you
   admit that a man may be healthy so far as he is flesh, why do you not
   say he may be healthy so far as he is spirit?

   A. I will follow in the line you point out,

   "and you to-day

   Shall ne'er escape; where'r you call, I come."

   C. I am ready to listen.

   A. And I to speak to deaf ears. I will therefore reply to your
   argument. Made up of soul and body, we have the nature of both
   substances. As the body is said to be healthy if it is troubled with no
   weakness, so the soul is free from fault if it is unshaken and
   undisturbed. And yet, although the body may be healthy, sound, and
   active, with all the faculties in their full vigour, yet it suffers
   much from infirmities at more or less frequent intervals, and, however
   strong it may be, is sometimes distressed by various humours; so the
   soul, bearing the onset of thoughts and agitations, even though it
   escape shipwreck, does not sail without danger, and remembering its
   weakness, is always anxious about death, according as it is written,
   [5323] "What man is he that shall live and not see death?"--death,
   which threatens all mortal men, not through the decay of nature, but
   through the death of sin, according to the prophet's words, [5324] "The
   soul that sinneth, it shall die." Besides, we know that Enoch and Elias
   have not yet seen this death which is common to man and the brutes.
   Show me a body which is never sick, or which after sickness is ever
   safe and sound, and I will show you a soul which never sinned, and
   after acquiring virtues will never again sin. The thing is impossible,
   and all the more when we remember that vice borders on virtue, and
   that, if you deviate ever so little, you will either go astray or fall
   over a precipice. How small is the interval between obstinacy and
   perseverance, miserliness and frugality, liberality and extravagance,
   wisdom and craft, intrepidity and rashness, caution and timidity! some
   of which are classed as good, others as bad. And the same applies to
   bodies. If you take precautions against biliousness, the phlegm
   increases. If you dry up the humours too quickly, the blood becomes
   heated and vitiated with bile, and a sallow hue spreads over the
   countenance. Without question, however much we may exercise all the
   care of the physician, and regulate our diet, and be free from
   indigestion and whatever fosters disease, the causes of which are in
   some cases hidden from us and known to God alone, we shiver with cold,
   or burn with fever, or howl with colic, and implore the help of the
   true physician, our Saviour, and [5325] say with the Apostles, "Master,
   save us, we perish."

   12. C. Granted that no one could avoid all sin in boyhood, youth, and
   early manhood; can you deny that very many righteous and holy men,
   after falling into vice, have heartily devoted themselves to the
   acquisition of virtue and through these have escaped sin?

   A. This is what I told you at the beginning--that it rests with
   ourselves either to sin or not to sin, and to put the hand either to
   good or evil; and thus free will is preserved, but according to
   circumstances, time, and the state of human frailty; we maintain,
   however, that perpetual freedom from sin is reserved for God only, and
   for Him Who being the Word was made flesh without incurring the defects
   and the sins of the flesh. And, because I am able to avoid sin for a
   short time, you cannot logically infer that I am able to do so
   continually. Can I fast, watch, walk, sing, sit, sleep perpetually?

   C. Why then in Holy Scripture are we stimulated to aim at perfect
   righteousness? For example: [5326] "Blessed are the pure in heart, for
   they shall see God," and [5327] "Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
   who walk in the law of the Lord." And God says to Abraham, [5328] "I am
   thy God, be thou pleasing in My sight, and be thou without spot, or
   blame, and I will make My covenant between Me and thee, and will
   multiply thee exceedingly." If that is impossible which Scripture
   testifies, it was useless to command it to be done.

   A. You play upon Scripture until you wear a question threadbare, and
   remind me of the platform tricks of a conjurer who assumes a variety of
   characters, and is now Mars, next moment Venus; so that he who was at
   first all sternness and ferocity is dissolved into feminine softness.
   For the objection you now raise with an air of novelty--"Blessed are
   the pure in heart," "Blessed are the undefiled in the way," and "Be
   without spot," and so forth--is refuted when the Apostle replies,
   [5329] "We know in part, and we prophesy in part," and, "Now we see
   through a mirror darkly, but when that which is perfect is come, that
   which is in part shall be done away." And therefore we have but the
   shadow and likeness of the pure heart, which hereafter is destined to
   see God, and, free from spot or stain, to live with Abraham. However
   great the patriarch, prophet, or Apostle may be, it is [5330] said to
   them, in the words of our Lord and Saviour, "If ye being evil, know how
   to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father
   Which is in heaven give good things to them which ask Him?" Then again
   even Abraham, to whom it was said, [5331] "Be thou without spot and
   blame," in the consciousness of his frailty fell upon his face to the
   earth. And when God had spoken to Him, saying, "Thy wife Sarai shall no
   longer be called Sarai, but Sara shall her name be, and I will give
   thee a son by her, and I will bless him and he shall become a great
   nation, and kings of nations shall spring from him," the narrative at
   once proceeds to say, "Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and
   said in his heart, Shall a child be born unto him that is an hundred
   years old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear?" And
   Abraham said unto God, "Oh, that Ishmael might live before thee!" And
   God said, "Nay, but Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son, and thou
   shalt call his name Isaac," and so on. He certainly had heard the words
   of God, "I am thy God, be thou pleasing in My sight, and without spot";
   why then did he not believe what God promised, and why did he laugh in
   his heart, thinking that he escaped the notice of God, and not daring
   to laugh openly? Moreover he gives the reasons for his unbelief, and
   says, "How is it possible for a man that is an hundred years old to
   beget a son of a wife that is ninety years old?" "Oh, that Ishmael
   might live before thee," he says. "Ishmael whom thou once gavest me. I
   do not ask a hard thing, I am content with the blessing I have
   received." God convinced him by a mysterious reply. He said, "Yea." The
   meaning is, that shall come to pass which you think shall not be. Your
   wife Sara shall bear you a son, and before she conceives, before he is
   born, I will give the boy a name. For, from your error in secretly
   laughing, your son shall be called Isaac, that is laughter. But if you
   think that God is seen by those who are pure in heart in this world,
   why did Moses, who had previously said, "I have seen the Lord face to
   face, and my life is preserved," afterwards entreat that he might see
   him distinctly? And because he said that he had seen God, the Lord told
   him, [5332] "Thou canst not see My face. For man shall not see My face,
   and live." Wherefore also the Apostle [5333] calls Him the only
   invisible God, Who dwells in light unapproachable, and Whom no man hath
   seen, nor can see. And the Evangelist John in holy accents testifies,
   saying, [5334] "No man hath at any time seen God. The only begotten Son
   Who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him." He Who sees,
   also declares, not how great He is Who is seen, nor how much He knows
   Who declares; but as much as the capacity of mortals can receive.

   13. And whereas you think he is blessed who is undefiled in the way,
   and walks in His law, you must interpret the former clause by the
   latter. From the many proofs I have adduced you have learnt that no one
   has been able to fulfil the law. And if the Apostle, in comparison with
   the grace of Christ, reckoned those things as filth which formerly,
   under the law, he counted gain, so that he might win Christ, how much
   more certain ought we to be that the reason why the grace of Christ and
   of the Gospel has been added is that, under the law, no one could be
   justified? Now if, under the law, no one is justified, how is he
   perfectly undefiled in the way who is still walking and hastening to
   reach the goal? Surely, he who is in the course, and who is advancing
   on the road, is inferior to him who has reached his journey's end. If,
   then, he is undefiled and perfect who is still walking in the way and
   advancing in the law, what more shall he have who has arrived at the
   end of life and of the law? Hence the Apostle, speaking of our Lord,
   says that, at the end of the world, when all virtues shall receive
   their consummation, He will present His holy Church to Himself without
   spot or wrinkle, and yet you think that Church perfect, while yet in
   the flesh, which is subject to death and decay. You deserve to be told,
   with the Corinthians, [5335] "Ye are already perfect, ye are already
   made rich: ye reign without us, and I would that ye did reign, that we
   might also reign with you"--since true and stainless perfection belongs
   to the inhabitants of heaven, and is reserved for that day when the
   bridegroom shall say to the bride, [5336] "Thou art all fair, my love;
   and there is no spot in thee." And in this sense we must understand the
   words: [5337] "That ye may be blameless and harmless, as children of
   God, without blemish"; for He did not say ye are, but may be. He is
   contemplating the future, not stating a case pertaining to the present;
   so that here is toil and effort, in that other world the rewards of
   labour and of virtue. Lastly, John writes: [5338] "Beloved, we are sons
   of God, and it is not yet made manifest what we shall be. We know that
   when He shall be manifested, we shall be like Him: for we shall see Him
   even as He is." Although, then, we are sons of God, yet likeness to
   God, and the true contemplation of God, is promised us then, when He
   shall appear in His majesty.

   14. From this swelling pride springs the audacity in prayer which marks
   the directions in your letter to a [5339] certain widow as to how the
   saints ought to pray. "He," you say, [5340] "rightly lifts up his hands
   to God; he pours out supplications with a good conscience who can say,
   Thou knowest, Lord, how holy, how innocent, how pure from all deceit,
   wrong, and robbery are the hands which I spread out unto Thee; how
   righteous, how spotless, and free from all falsehood are the lips with
   which I pour forth my prayers unto Thee, that Thou mayest pity me.'" Is
   this the prayer of a Christian, or of a proud Pharisee like him who
   [5341] says in the Gospel, "God, I thank Thee that I am not as other
   men are, robbers, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican: I fast
   twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess." Yet he merely
   thanks God because, by His mercy, he is not as other men: he execrates
   sin, and does not claim his righteousness as his own. But you say, "Now
   Thou knowest how holy, how innocent, how pure from all deceit, wrong,
   and robbery are the hands which I spread out before Thee." He says that
   he fasts twice in the week, that he may afflict his vicious and wanton
   flesh, and he gives tithes of all his substance. For [5342] "the ransom
   of a man's life is his riches." You join the devil in boasting, [5343]
   "I will ascend above the stars, I will place my throne in heaven, and I
   will be like the Most High." David says, [5344] "My loins are filled
   with illusions"; and [5345] "My wounds stink and are corrupt because of
   my foolishness"; and [5346] "Enter not into judgment with Thy servant";
   and [5347] "In Thy sight no man living shall be justified." You boast
   that you are holy, innocent, and pure, and spread out clean hands unto
   God. And you are not satisfied with glorying in all your works, unless
   you say that you are pure from all sins of speech; and you tell us how
   righteous, how spotless, how free from all falsehood your lips are. The
   Psalmist sings, [5348] "Every man is a liar"; and this is supported by
   apostolical authority: "That God may be true," says St. Paul, [5349]
   "and every man a liar"; and yet you have lips righteous, spotless, and
   free from all falsehood. Isaiah laments, saying, [5350] "Woe is me! for
   I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the
   midst of a people of unclean lips"; and afterwards one of the seraphim
   brings a hot coal, taken with the tongs, to purify the prophet's lips,
   for he was not, according to the tenor of your words, arrogant, but he
   confessed his own faults. Just as we read in the Psalms, [5351] "What
   shall be due unto thee, and what shall be done more unto thee in
   respect of a deceitful tongue? Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals
   that make desolate." And after all this swelling with pride, and
   boastfulness in prayer, and confidence in your holiness, like one fool
   trying to persuade another, you finish with the words "These lips with
   which I pour out my supplication that Thou mayest have pity on me." If
   you are holy, if you are innocent, if you are cleansed from all
   defilement, if you have sinned neither in word nor deed--although James
   says, [5352] "He who offends not in word is a perfect man," and "No one
   can curb his tongue"--how is it that you sue for mercy? so that,
   forsooth, you bewail yourself, and pour out prayers because you are
   holy, pure, and innocent, a man of stainless lips, free from all
   falsehood, and endowed with a power like that of God. Christ prayed
   thus on the cross: [5353] "My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?
   Why art Thou so far from helping Me?" And, again, [5354] "Father, into
   Thy hands I commend My spirit," and [5355] "Father, forgive them, for
   they know not what they do." And this is He, who, returning thanks for
   us, had said, [5356] "I confess to Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and
   earth."

   15. Our Lord so instructed His Apostles that, daily at the sacrifice of
   His body, believers make bold to say, "Our Father, Which art in Heaven,
   hallowed be Thy name"; they earnestly desire the name of God, which in
   itself is holy, to be hallowed in themselves; you say, "Thou knowest,
   Lord, how holy, how innocent, and how pure are my hands." Then they
   say: "Thy Kingdom come," anticipating the hope of the future kingdom,
   so that, when Christ reigns, sin may by no means reign in their mortal
   body, and to this they couple the words, "Thy will be done in earth as
   it is in Heaven"; so that human weakness may imitate the angels, and
   the will of our Lord may be fulfilled on earth; you say, "A man can, if
   he chooses, be free from all sin." The Apostles prayed for the daily
   bread, or the bread better than all food, which was to come, so that
   they might be worthy to receive the body of Christ; and you are led by
   your excess of holiness and well established righteousness to boldly
   claim the heavenly gifts. Next comes, "Forgive us our debts, as we also
   forgive our debtors." No sooner do they rise from the baptismal font,
   and by being born again and incorporated into our Lord and Saviour thus
   fulfil what is written of them, [5357] "Blessed are they whose
   iniquities are forgiven and whose sins are covered," than at the first
   communion of the body of Christ they say, "Forgive us our debts,"
   though these debts had been forgiven them at their confession of
   Christ; but you in your arrogant pride boast of the cleanness of your
   holy hands and of the purity of your speech. However thorough the
   conversion of a man may be, and however perfect his possession of
   virtue after a time of sins and failings, can such persons be as free
   from fault as they who are just leaving the font of Christ? And yet
   these latter are commanded to say, "Forgive us our debts, as we also
   forgive our debtors"; not in the spirit of a false humility, but
   because they are afraid of human frailty and dread their own
   conscience. They say, "Lead us not into temptation"; you and Jovinian
   unite in saying that those who with a full faith have been baptized
   cannot be further tempted or sin. Lastly, they add, "But deliver us
   from the evil one." Why do they beg from the Lord what they have
   already by the power of free will? Oh, man, now thou hast been made
   clean in the laver, and of thee it is said, "Who is this that cometh up
   all white, leaning upon her beloved?" The bride, therefore, is washed,
   yet she cannot keep her purity, unless she be supported by the Lord.
   How is it that you long to be set free by the mercy of God, you who but
   a little while ago were released from your sins? The only explanation
   is the principle by which we maintain that, when we have done all, we
   must confess we are unprofitable.

   16. So then your prayer outdoes the pride of the Pharisee, and you are
   condemned when compared with the Publican. He, standing afar off, did
   not dare to lift up his eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his breast,
   saying, [5358] "God be merciful unto me a sinner." And on this is based
   our Lord's declaration, "I say unto you this man went down to his house
   justified rather than the other. For every one that exalteth himself
   shall be abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." The
   Apostles are humbled that they may be exalted. Your disciples are
   lifted up that they may fall. In your flattery of the widow previously
   mentioned you are not ashamed to say that piety such as is found on
   earth, and truth which is everywhere a stranger, had made their home
   with her in preference to all others. You do not recollect the familiar
   words, [5359] "O my people, they which call thee blessed cause thee to
   err, and destroy the paths of thy feet"; and you expressly praise her
   and say, "Happy beyond all thought are you! how blessed! if
   righteousness, which is believed to be now nowhere but in Heaven, is
   found with you alone on earth." Is this teaching or slaying? Is it
   raising from earth, or casting down from heaven, to attribute that to a
   poor creature of a woman, which angels would not dare arrogate to
   themselves? If piety, truth, and righteousness are found on earth
   nowhere but in one woman, where shall we find your righteous followers,
   who, you boast, are sinless on earth? These two chapters on prayer and
   praise you and your disciples are wont to swear are none of yours, and
   yet your brilliant style is so clearly seen in them, and the elegance
   of your Ciceronian diction is so marked that, although you strut about
   with the slow pace of a tortoise, you have not the courage to
   acknowledge what you teach in private and expose for sale. Happy man!
   whose books no one writes out but your own disciples, so that whatever
   appears to be unacceptable, you may contend is not your own but some
   one else's work. And where is the man with ability enough to imitate
   the charm of your language?

   17. C. I can put it off no longer; my patience is completely overcome
   by your iniquitous words. Tell me, pray, what sin have little infants
   committed. Neither the consciousness of wrong nor ignorance can be
   imputed to those who, according to the prophet Jonah, know not their
   right hand from their left. They cannot sin, and they can perish; their
   knees are too weak to walk, they utter inarticulate cries; we laugh at
   their attempts to speak; and, all the while, poor unfortunates! the
   torments of eternal misery are prepared for them.

   A. Ah! now that your disciples have turned masters you begin to be
   fluent, not to say eloquent. Antony, [5360] an excellent orator, whose
   praises Tully loudly proclaims, says that he had seen many fluent men,
   but so far never an eloquent speaker; so don't amuse me with flowers of
   oratory which have not grown in your own garden, and with which the
   ears of inexperience and of boyhood are wont to be tickled, but plainly
   tell me what you think.

   C. What I say is this--you must at least allow that they have no sin
   who cannot sin.

   A. I will allow it, if they have been baptized into Christ; and if you
   will not then immediately bind me to agree with your opinion that a man
   can be without sin if he chooses; for they neither have the power nor
   the will; but they are free from all sin through the grace of God,
   which they received in their baptism.

   C. You force me to make an invidious remark and ask, Why, what sin have
   they committed? that you may immediately have me stoned in some popular
   tumult. You have not the power to kill me, but you certainly have the
   will.

   A. He slays a heretic who allows him to be a heretic. But when we
   rebuke him we give him life; you may die to your heresy, and live to
   the Catholic faith.

   C. If you know us to be heretics, why do you not accuse us?

   A. Because the [5361] Apostle teaches me to avoid a heretic after the
   first and second admonition, not to accuse him. The Apostle knew that
   such an one is perverse and self-condemned. Besides, it would be the
   height of folly to make my faith depend on another man's judgment. For
   supposing some one were to call you a Catholic, am I to immediately
   give assent? Whoever defends you, and says that you rightly hold your
   perverse opinions, does not succeed in rescuing you from infamy, but
   charges himself with perfidy. Your numerous supporters will never prove
   you to be a Catholic, but will show that you are a heretic. But I would
   have such opinions as these suppressed by ecclesiastical authority;
   otherwise we shall be in the case of those who show some dreadful
   picture to a crying child. May the fear of God grant us this--to
   despise all other fears. Therefore, either defend your opinions, or
   abandon what you are unable to defend. Whoever may be called in to
   defend you must be enrolled as a partisan, not as a patron.

   18. C. Tell me, pray, and rid me of all doubts, why little children are
   baptized.

   A. That their sins may be forgiven them in baptism.

   C. What sin are they guilty of? How can any one be set free who is not
   bound?

   A. You ask me! The Gospel trumpet will reply, the teacher of the
   Gentiles, the golden vessel shining throughout the world: [5362] "Death
   reigned from Adam even unto Moses: even over those who did not sin
   after the likeness of the transgression of Adam, who is a figure of Him
   that was to come." And if you object that some are spoken of who did
   not sin, you must understand that they did not sin in the same way as
   Adam did by transgressing God's command in Paradise. But all men are
   held liable either on account of their ancient forefather Adam, or on
   their own account. He that is an infant is released in baptism from the
   chain which bound his father. He who is old enough to have discernment
   is set free from the chain of his own or another's sin by the blood of
   Christ. You must not think me a heretic because I take this view, for
   the blessed martyr Cyprian, whose rival you boast of being in the
   classification of Scripture proofs, in the [5363] epistle addressed to
   Bishop Fidus on the Baptism of Infants speaks thus: "Moreover, if even
   the worst offenders, and those who previous to baptism sin much against
   God, once they believe have the gift of remission of sins, and no one
   is kept from baptism and from grace, how much more ought not an infant
   to be kept from baptism seeing that, being only just born, he has
   committed no sin? He has only, being born according to the flesh among
   Adam's sons, incurred the taint of ancient death by his first birth.
   And he is the more easily admitted to remission of sins because of the
   very fact that not his own sins but those of another are remitted to
   him. And so, dearest brother, it was our decision in council that no
   one ought to be kept by us from baptism and from the grace of God, Who
   is merciful to all, and kind, and good. And whereas this rule ought to
   be observed and kept with reference to all, bear in mind that it ought
   so much the more to be observed with regard to infants themselves and
   those just born, for they have the greater claims on our assistance in
   order to obtain Divine mercy, because their cries and tears from the
   very birth are one perpetual prayer."

   19. That holy man and eloquent bishop Augustin not long ago wrote to
   [5364] Marcellinus (the same that was afterwards, though innocent, put
   to death by heretics on the pretext of his taking part in the tyranny
   of Heraclian [5365] ) two treatises on infant baptism, in opposition to
   your heresy which maintains that infants are baptized not for remission
   of sins, but for admission to the kingdom of heaven, according as it is
   written in the Gospel, [5366] "Except a man be born again of water and
   of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven." He
   addressed a [5367] third, moreover, to the same Marcellinus, against
   those who say as do you, that a man can be free from sin, if he
   chooses, without the help of God. And, recently, a [5368] fourth to
   Hilary against this doctrine of yours, which is full of perversity. And
   he is said to have others on the anvil with special regard to you,
   which have not yet come to hand. Wherefore, I think I must abandon my
   task, for fear Horace's words may be thrown at me, [5369] "Don't carry
   firewood into a forest." For we must either say the same as he does,
   and that would be superfluous; or, if we wished to say something fresh,
   we should [5370] find our best points anticipated by that splendid
   genius. One thing I will say and so end my discourse, that you ought
   either to give us a new creed, so that, after baptizing children into
   the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, you may baptize them into
   the kingdom of heaven; or, if you have one baptism both for infants and
   for persons of mature age, it follows that infants also should be
   baptized for the remission of sins after the likeness of the
   transgression of Adam. But if you think the remission of another's sins
   implies injustice, and that he has no need of it who could not sin,
   cross over to Origen, your special favourite, who says that ancient
   offences [5371] committed long before in the heavens are loosed in
   baptism. You will then be not only led by his authority in other
   matters, but will be following his error in this also.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5282] Prov. x. 19.

   [5283] By a Synod under Siricius in a.d. 390.

   [5284] The allusion is to the African Synod, held a.d. 412, at which
   Celestius was condemned and excommunicated.

   [5285] Ps. cxxvii. 1.

   [5286] 1 Cor. ix. 24.

   [5287] v. 12.

   [5288] John v. 14.

   [5289] 1 Cor. iii. 16, 17.

   [5290] 2 Chron. xv. 2.

   [5291] The words are those of S. Barnabas. Possibly in Jerome's copy
   the passage may have been attributed to Ignatius.

   [5292] Ps. xvi. 4. Sept. and Vulgate.

   [5293] Acts xiii. 32; Ps. lxxxviii. 21.

   [5294] 2 Tim. iv. 13.

   [5295] Acts xxiii. 2 sq.

   [5296] S. John xviii. 23.

   [5297] 2 Tim. iv. 14.

   [5298] S. John vi. 70.

   [5299] Rom. ii. 4, 5.

   [5300] iii. 4.

   [5301] Jerem. xviii. 7, 8.

   [5302] Jonah iv. 10, 11.

   [5303] 1 Cor. xi. 6.

   [5304] Gen. xxviii. 20 sq.

   [5305] Gen. xxxii. 2.

   [5306] Gen. xxxii. 31. L. R.V. Penuel. Comp. Mt. xix. 4.

   [5307] Ib. 30. The words are Jacob's, but they are attributed to Moses
   as author.

   [5308] Gen. xxxix. 23.

   [5309] Gen. xlvi. 3, 4.

   [5310] Ex. xi. and xii.

   [5311] Prov. iii. 5, 6.

   [5312] Ps. v. 8.

   [5313] Prov. xvi. 3.

   [5314] 2 Cor. ii. 16.

   [5315] 2 Cor. iii. 4-6.

   [5316] 2 Cor. iv. 7.

   [5317] 2 Cor. x. 17, 18.

   [5318] 2 Cor. xii. 11.

   [5319] S. Luke v. 8.

   [5320] S. John xv. 5.

   [5321] S. John vi. 44.

   [5322] Esther vi. 1.

   [5323] Ps. lxxxix. 48.

   [5324] Ezek. xviii. 4.

   [5325] S. Matt. viii. 25.

   [5326] S. Matt. v. 8.

   [5327] Ps. cxix. 1.

   [5328] Gen. xvii. 1, 2.

   [5329] 1 Cor. xiii. 9, 10.

   [5330] S. Matt. vii. 11.

   [5331] Gen. xvii. 1 sq.

   [5332] Ex. xxxiii. 20.

   [5333] 1 Tim. i. 17; vi. 16.

   [5334] i. 18.

   [5335] 1 Cor. iv. 8.

   [5336] Cant. iv. 7.

   [5337] Phil. ii. 15.

   [5338] 1 John iii. 2.

   [5339] See S. Aug. De Gest. Pelag. § 16. The widow was Juliana, mother
   to Demetrias (to whom Jerome addressed his Letter CXXX. "On the keeping
   of Virginity"). Pelagius' letter to Demetrias is found in Jerome's
   works (Ed. Vall.), vol. xi. col. 15.

   [5340] The whole passage, as quoted by Augustin, runs as follows: "May
   piety find with thee a place which it has never found elsewhere. May
   truth, which no one now knows, be thy household friend; and the law of
   God, which is despised by almost all men, be honoured by thee alone."
   "How happy, how blessed art thou, if that justice which we are to
   believe exists only in heaven is found with thee alone upon earth."
   Then follow the words quoted above.

   [5341] S. Luke xviii. 11.

   [5342] Prov. xiii. 8.

   [5343] Is. xiv. 13, 14. Spoken of the King of Babylon.

   [5344] Ps. xxxviii. 7. Vulg.

   [5345] Ibid. 5.

   [5346] Ps. cxliii. 2.

   [5347] Ibid. 4.

   [5348] Ps. cxvi. 11.

   [5349] Rom. iii. 4.

   [5350] Is. vi. 5.

   [5351] Ps. cxx. 3. Vulg.

   [5352] James iii. 2.

   [5353] Ps. xxii. 2; Sept. and Vulgate. S. Matt xxvii. 46, R.V., "and
   from the words of my roaring."

   [5354] S. Luke xxiii. 46.

   [5355] S. Luke xxiii. 34.

   [5356] S. Matt. xi. 25.

   [5357] Ps. xxi. 1.

   [5358] S. Luke xviii. 13.

   [5359] Is. iii. 12.

   [5360] The grandfather of the Triumvir, born b.c. 142, died in the
   civil conflict excited by Marius, b.c. 87.

   [5361] Tit. iii. 10.

   [5362] Rom. v. 14.

   [5363] Cyp. Ep. 64 (al. 59). S. Augustine preaching at Carthage on June
   27, 413, quoted the same letter, which was a Synodical letter of a.d.
   253. See Bright's Anti-Pelagian Treatises, Introduction, p. xxi.

   [5364] Marcellinus was the lay imperial commissioner appointed to
   superintend the discussion between the Catholics and Donatists at the
   Council of Carthage, a.d. 411. In 413 Heraclian, governor of Africa,
   revolted against Honorius, the Emperor, and invaded Italy. The
   enterprise failed, and on his return to Africa the promoter of it was
   put to death. The Donatists, called by Jerome "heretics," are supposed
   to have accused Marcellinus of taking part in the rebellion. He was
   executed in 414.

   [5365] "On the Deserts and Remission of Sins, and the Baptism of
   Infants," in three books, the earliest of S. Augustin's Anti-Pelagian
   treatises. It was composed in reply to a letter from his friend
   Marcellinus, who was harassed by Pelagianising disputants. See S. Aug.
   "De Gest. Pel." § 25.

   [5366] S. John iii. 3.

   [5367] The "De Spiritu et Littera." Marcellinus found a difficulty in
   Augustin's view of the question of sinlessness. See Bright's
   Anti-Pelagian Treatises, Introduction, p. xix.

   [5368] Whether he who was made Bishop of Arles, in 429, is disputed.
   The treatise was the "De Natura et Gratia," written early in 415.

   [5369] Sat. i. 10.

   [5370] Or, better positions have been occupied.

   [5371] Origen held the pre-existence of souls, endowed with free will,
   and supposed their condition in this world to be the result of their
   conduct in their previous state of probation.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Prefaces.

   ------------------------

   The Prefaces to Jerome's works have in many cases a special value. This
   value is sometimes personal; they are the free expressions of his
   feelings to those whom he trusts. Sometimes it lies in the mention of
   particular events; sometimes in showing the special difficulties he
   encountered as a translator, or the state of mind of those for whom he
   wrote; sometimes in making us understand the extent and limits of his
   own knowledge, and the views on points such as the inspiration of
   Scripture which actuated him as a translator or commentator; sometimes,
   again, in the particular interpretations which he gives. These things
   gain a great importance from the fact that Jerome's influence and that
   of his Vulgate was preponderant in Western Europe for more than a
   thousand years.

   We have had to make a selection, not only from want of space, but also
   because the Prefaces are of very unequal value, and sometimes are mere
   repetitions of previous statements. We have therefore given specimens
   of each class of Preface; we have given also all which bears on the
   better understanding of the life and views of Jerome; but where a
   Preface repeats what has been said before, or where it gives facts or
   interpretations which are well known or of no particular value, we have
   contented ourselves with a short statement of its contents.

   The Prefaces fall under three heads: 1st. Those prefixed to Jerome's
   early works bearing on Church history or Scripture. 2d. The Prefaces to
   the Vulgate translation. 3d. Those prefixed to the Commentaries.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Prefaces to Jerome's Early Works.

   Preface to the Chronicle of Eusebius.

   The "Chronicle" is a book of universal history, giving the dates from
   the call of Abraham, and the Olympiads. For an account of it the reader
   is referred to the article of Dr. Salmon in the "Dictionary of
   Christian Antiquities." It was translated by Jerome in the years
   381-82, at Constantinople, where he was staying for the Council. This
   Preface shows that Jerome was already becoming aware of the
   difficulties arising from the various versions of the Old Testament,
   and of the necessity of going back to the Hebrew.

   Jerome to his friends [5372] Vincentius and Gallienus, Greeting:

   1. It has long been the practice of learned men to exercise their minds
   by rendering into Latin the works of Greek writers, and, what is more
   difficult, to translate the poems of illustrious authors though
   trammelled by the farther requirements of verse. It was thus that our
   Tully literally translated whole books of Plato; and after publishing
   an edition of [5373] Aratus (who may now be considered a Roman) in
   hexameter verse, he amused himself with the economics of Xenophon. In
   this latter work the golden river of eloquence again and again meets
   with obstacles, around which its waters break and foam to such an
   extent that persons unacquainted with the original would not believe
   they were reading Cicero's words. And no wonder! It is hard to follow
   another man's lines and everywhere keep within bounds. It is an arduous
   task to preserve felicity and grace unimpaired in a translation. Some
   word has forcibly expressed a given thought; I have no word of my own
   to convey the meaning; and while I am seeking to satisfy the sense I
   may go a long way round and accomplish but a small distance of my
   journey. Then we must take into account the ins and outs of
   transposition, the variations in cases, the diversity of figures, and,
   lastly, the peculiar, and, so to speak, the native idiom of the
   language. A literal translation sounds absurd; if, on the other hand, I
   am obliged to change either the order or the words themselves, I shall
   appear to have forsaken the duty of a translator.

   2. So, my dear Vincentius, and you, Gallienus, whom I love as my own
   soul, I beseech you, whatever may be the value of this hurried piece of
   work, to read it with the feelings of a friend rather than with those
   of a critic. And I ask this all the more earnestly because, as you
   know, I dictated with great rapidity to my amanuensis; and how
   difficult the task is, the sacred records testify; for the old flavour
   is not preserved in the Greek version by the Seventy. It was this that
   stimulated Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion; and the result of their
   labors was to impart a totally different character to one and the same
   work; one strove to give word for word, another the general meaning,
   while the third desired to avoid any great divergency from the
   ancients. A fifth, sixth, and seventh edition, though no one knows to
   what authors they are to be attributed, exhibit so pleasing a variety
   of their own that, in spite of their being anonymous, they have won an
   authoritative position. Hence, some go so far as to consider the sacred
   writings somewhat harsh and grating to the ear; which arises from the
   fact that the persons of whom I speak are not aware that the writings
   in question are a translation from the Hebrew, and therefore, looking
   at the surface not at the substance, they shudder at the squalid dress
   before they discover the fair body which the language clothes. In fact,
   what can be more musical than the Psalter? Like the writings of our own
   [5374] Flaccus and the Grecian Pindar it now trips along in iambics,
   now flows in sonorous alcaics, now swells into sapphics, now [5375]
   marches in half-foot metre. What can be more lovely than the strains of
   Deuteronomy and Isaiah? What more grave than Solomon's words? What more
   finished than Job? All these, as Josephus and Origen tell us, were
   composed in hexameters and pentameters, and so circulated amongst their
   own people. When we read these in Greek they have some meaning; when in
   Latin they are utterly incoherent. But if any one thinks that the grace
   of language does not suffer through translation, let him render Homer
   word for word into Latin. I will go farther and say that, if he will
   translate this author into the prose of his own language, the order of
   the words will seem ridiculous, and the most eloquent of poets almost
   dumb.

   3. What is the drift of all this? I would not have you think it strange
   if here and there we stumble; if the language lag; if it bristle with
   consonants or present gaping chasms of vowels; or be cramped by
   condensation of the narrative. The most learned among men have toiled
   at the same task; and in addition to the difficulty which all
   experience, and which we have alleged to attend all translation, it
   must not be forgotten that a peculiar difficulty besets us, inasmuch as
   the history is manifold, is full of barbarous names, circumstances of
   which the Latins know nothing, dates which are tangled knots, critical
   marks blended alike with the events and the numbers, so that it is
   almost harder to discern the sequence of the words than to come to a
   knowledge of what is related.

   [Here follows a long passage showing an arrangement according to which
   the dates are distinguished by certain colours as belonging to one or
   another of the kingdoms, the history of which is dealt with. This
   passage seems unintelligible in the absence of the coloured figures,
   and would be of no use unless the book with its original arrangement
   were being studied.]

   I am well aware that there will be many who, with their customary
   fondness for universal detraction (from which the only escape is by
   writing nothing at all), will drive their fangs into this volume. They
   will cavil at the dates, change the order, impugn the accuracy of
   events, winnow the syllables, and, as is very frequently the case, will
   impute the negligence of copyists to the authors. I should be within my
   right if I were to rebut them by saying that they need not read unless
   they choose; but I would rather send them away in a calm state of mind,
   so that they may attribute to the Greek author the credit which is his
   due, and may recognize that any insertions for which we are responsible
   have been taken from other men of the highest repute. The truth is that
   I have partly discharged the office of a translator and partly that of
   a writer. I have with the utmost fidelity rendered the Greek portion,
   and at the same time have added certain things which appeared to me to
   have been allowed to slip, particularly in the Roman history, which
   Eusebius, the author of this book, as it seems to me, only glanced at;
   not so much because of ignorance, for he was a learned man, as because,
   writing in Greek, he thought them of slight importance to his
   countrymen. So again from Ninus and Abraham, right up to the captivity
   of Troy, the translation is from the Greek only. From Troy to the
   twentieth year of Constantine there is much, at one time separately
   added, at another intermingled, which I have gleaned with great
   diligence from Tranquillus and other famous historians. Moreover, the
   portion from the aforesaid year of Constantine to the sixth consulship
   of the Emperor Valens and the second of Valentinianus is entirely my
   own. Content to end here, I have reserved the remaining period, that of
   Gratianus and Theodosius, for a wider historical survey; not that I am
   afraid to discuss the living freely and truthfully, for the fear of God
   banishes the fear of man; but because while our country is still
   exposed to the fury of the barbarians everything is in confusion.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5372] Vincentius appears to have attached himself to Jerome at
   Constantinople and remained with him till the end of the century.
   (Jerome, Against John of Jerusalem, 41; Apol., iii. 22; Letter
   LXXXVIII.) Nothing is known of Gallienus.

   [5373] Flourished b.c. 270.

   [5374] That is, Horace.

   [5375] Sublimia debent ingredi.--Quint, 9, 4 fin.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Preface to the Translation of Origen's Two Homilies on the Song of
   Songs.

   Written at Rome, a.d. 383.

   Jerome to the most holy Pope Damasus:

   Origen, whilst in his other books he has surpassed all others, has in
   the Song of Songs surpassed himself. He wrote ten volumes upon it,
   which amount to almost twenty thousand lines, and in these he
   discussed, first the version of the Seventy Translators, then those of
   Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, and lastly, a fifth version which he
   states that he found on the coast of Atrium, with such magnificence and
   fulness, that he appears to me to have realized what is said in the
   poem: "The king brought me into his chamber." I have left that work on
   one side, since it would require almost boundless leisure and labour
   and money to translate so great a work into Latin, even if it could be
   worthily done; and I have translated these two short treatises, which
   he composed in the form of daily lectures for those who were still like
   babes and sucklings, and I have studied faithfulness rather than
   elegance. You can conceive how great a value the larger work possesses,
   when the smaller gives you such satisfaction.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Preface to the Book on Hebrew Names.

   The origin and scope of this book is described in the Preface itself.
   It was written in the year 388, two years after Jerome had settled at
   Bethlehem. He had, immediately on arriving in Palestine, three years
   previously, set to work to improve his knowledge of Hebrew, with a view
   to his translation of the Old Testament, which was begun in 391. This
   book, therefore, and the two which follow, may be taken as records of
   studies preparatory to the Vulgate.

   Philo, the most erudite man among the Jews, is declared by Origen to
   have done what I am now doing; he set forth a book of Hebrew Names,
   classing them under their initial letters, and placing the etymology of
   each at the side. This work I originally proposed to translate into
   Latin. It is well known in the Greek world, and is to be found in all
   libraries. But I found that the copies were so discordant to one
   another, and the order so confused, that I judged it to be better to
   say nothing, rather than to write what would justly be condemned. A
   work of this kind, however, appeared likely to be of use; and my
   friends Lupulianus and Valerianus [5376] urged me to attempt it,
   because, as they thought, I had made some progress in the knowledge of
   Hebrew. I, therefore, went through all the books of Scripture in order,
   and in the restoration which I have now made of the ancient fabric, I
   think that I have produced a work which may be found valuable by Greeks
   as well as Latins.

   I here in the Preface beg the reader to take notice that, if he finds
   anything omitted in this work, it is reserved for mention in another. I
   have at this moment on hand a book of Hebrew Questions, an undertaking
   of a new kind such as has never until now been heard of amongst either
   the Greeks or the Latins. I say this, not with a view of arrogantly
   puffing up my own work, but because I know how much labour I have spent
   on it, and wish to provoke those whose knowledge is deficient to read
   it. I recommend all those who wish to possess both that work and the
   present one, and also the book of Hebrew Places, which I am about to
   publish, to make no account of the Jews and all their ebullitions of
   vexation. Moreover, I have added the meaning of the words and names in
   the New Testament, so that the fabric might receive its last touch and
   might stand complete. I wished also in this to imitate Origen, whom all
   but the ignorant acknowledge as the greatest teacher of the Churches
   next to the Apostles; for in this work, which stands among the noblest
   monuments of his genius, he endeavoured as a Christian to supply what
   Philo, as a Jew, had omitted.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5376] Nothing is known of these men. It is very improbable that this
   Valerianus was the bishop of Apuleia, who must, however, have been
   known to Jerome.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Preface to the Book on the Sites and Names of Hebrew Places.

   For the scope and value of this book see Prolegomena. It was written
   a.d. 388.

   Eusebius, who took his second name from the blessed Martyr Pamphilus,
   after he had written the ten books of his "Ecclesiastical History," the
   Chronicle of Dates, of which I published a Latin version, the book in
   which he set forth the names of the different nations and those given
   to them of old by the Jews and by those of the present day, the
   topography of the land of Judæa and the portions allotted to the
   tribes, together with a representation of Jerusalem itself and its
   temple, which he accompanied with a very short explanation, bestowed
   his labour at the end of his life upon this little work, of which the
   design is to gather for us out of the Holy Scriptures the names of
   almost all the cities, mountains, rivers, hamlets, and other places,
   whether they remain the same or have since been changed or in some
   degree corrupted. I have taken up the work of this admirable man, and
   have translated it, following the arrangement of the Greeks, and taking
   the words in the order of their initial letters, but leaving out those
   names which did not seem worthy of mention, and making a considerable
   number of alterations. I have explained my method once for all in the
   Preface to my translation of the Chronicle, where I said that I might
   be called at once a translator and the composer of a new work; but I
   repeat this especially because one who had hardly the first tincture of
   letters has ventured upon a translation of this very book into Latin,
   though his language is hardly to be called Latin. His lack of
   scholarship will be seen by the observant reader as soon as he compares
   it with my translation. I do not pretend to a style which soars to the
   skies; but I hope that I can rise above one which grovels on the earth.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Preface to the Book of Hebrew Questions.

   Written a.d. 388. For the scope and character of this work, see
   Prolegomena.

   The object of the Preface to a book is to set forth the argument of the
   work which follows; but I am compelled to begin by answering what has
   been said against me. My case is somewhat like that of Terence, who
   turned the scenic prologues of his plays into a defence of himself. We
   have a [5377] Luscius Lanuvinus, like the one who worried him, and who
   brought charges against the poet as if he had been a plunderer of the
   treasury. The bard of Mantua suffered in the same way; he had
   translated a few verses of Homer very exactly, and they said that he
   was nothing but a plagiarist from the ancients. But he answered them
   that it was no small proof of strength to wrest the club of Hercules
   from his hands. Why, even Tully, who stands on the pinnacle of Roman
   eloquence, that king of orators and glory of the Latin tongue, has
   actions for embezzlement [5378] brought against him by the Greeks. I
   cannot, therefore, be surprised if a poor little fellow like me is
   exposed to the gruntings of vile swine who trample our pearls under
   their feet, when some of the most learned of men, men whose glory ought
   to have hushed the voice of ill will, have felt the flames of envy. It
   is true, this happened by a kind of justice to men whose eloquence had
   filled with its resonance the theatres and the senate, the public
   assembly and the rostra; hardihood always courts detraction, and (as
   Horace says):

   "The [5379] highest peaks invoke

   The lightning's stroke."

   But I am in a corner, remote from the city and the forum, and the
   wranglings of crowded courts; yet, even so (as Quintilian says)
   ill-will has sought me out. Therefore, I beseech the reader,

   "If [5380] one there be, if one,

   Who, rapt by strong desire, these lines shall read,"

   not to expect eloquence or oratorical grace in those Books of Hebrew
   Questions, which I propose to write on all the sacred books; but
   rather, that he should himself answer my detractors for me, and tell
   them that a work of a new kind can claim some indulgence. I am poor and
   of low estate; I neither possess riches nor do I think it right to
   accept them if they are offered me; and, similarly, let me tell them
   that it is impossible for them to have the riches of Christ, that is,
   the knowledge of the Scriptures, and the world's riches as well. It
   will be my simple aim, therefore, first, to point out the mistakes of
   those who suspect some fault in the Hebrew Scriptures, and, secondly,
   to correct the faults, which evidently teem in the Greek and Latin
   copies, by a reference to the original authority; and, further, to
   explain the etymology of things, names, and countries, when it is not
   apparent from the sound of the Latin words, by giving a paraphrase in
   the vulgar tongue. To enable the student more easily to take note of
   these emendations, I propose, in the first place, to set out the true
   [5381] reading itself, as I am now able to do, and then, by bringing
   the later readings into comparison with it, to [5382] indicate what has
   been omitted or added or altered. It is not my purpose, as snarling
   ill-will pretends, to convict the LXX. of error, nor do I look upon my
   own labour as a disparagement of theirs. The fact is that they, since
   their work was undertaken for King Ptolemy of Alexandria, did not
   choose to bring to light all the mysteries which the sacred writings
   contain, and especially those which give the promise of the advent of
   Christ, for fear that he who held the Jews in esteem because they were
   believed to worship one God, would come to think that they worshipped a
   second. But we find that the Evangelists, and even our Lord and
   Saviour, and the Apostle Paul, also, bring forward many citations as
   coming from the Old Testament which are not contained in our copies;
   and on these I shall dilate more fully in their proper places. But it
   is clear from this fact that those are the best mss. which most
   correspond with the authoritative words of the New Testament. Add to
   this that Josephus, who gives the story of the Seventy Translators,
   reports them as translating only the five books of Moses; and we also
   acknowledge that these are more in harmony with the Hebrew than the
   rest. And, further, those who afterward came into the field as
   translators--I mean Aquila and Symmachus and Theodotion--give a version
   very different from that which we use. [5383]

   I have but one word more to say, and it may calm my detractors. Foreign
   goods are to be imported only to the regions where there is a demand
   for them. Country people are not obliged to buy balsam, pepper, and
   dates. As to Origen, I say nothing. His name (if I may compare small
   things with great) is even more than my own the object of ill-will,
   because, though following the common version in his Homilies, which
   were spoken to common people, yet, in his Tomes, [5384] that is, in his
   fuller discussion of Scripture, he yields to the Hebrew as the truth,
   and, though surrounded by his own forces, occasionally seeks the
   foreign tongue as his ally. I will only say this about him: that I
   should gladly have his knowledge of the Scriptures, even if accompanied
   with all the ill-will which clings to his name, and that I do not care
   a straw for these shades and spectral ghosts, whose nature is said to
   be to chatter in dark corners and be a terror to babies.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5377] Terence's rival, to whom he makes allusions in the Prologi to
   the Eunuchus, Heoutontimoroumenos and Phormio.

   [5378] Repetundarum. Properly an action to compel one who has left
   office to restore public money which he had embezzled.

   [5379] Hor. Odes II., x. 19, 20.

   [5380] Virgil, Ec., vi. 10.

   [5381] Ipsa testimonia. This is what he calls in other places Hebraica
   veritas. Jerome was right in the main in correcting the LXX, and other
   Greek versions by the Hebrew. He was not aware (as has been since made
   clear) that there are various readings in the Hebrew itself, and that
   these may sometimes be corrected by the LXX., which was made from older
   mss.

   [5382] That is, by the obeli (), to show what has been left out, and
   the asterisk (*), to show what has been inserted.

   [5383] That is, from the copies of the LXX. commonly used in the fourth
   century.

   [5384] Larger Commentaries.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Preface to the Commentary on Ecclesiastes.

   Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, Bethlehem, a.d. 388.

   I remember that, about five years ago, when I was still living at Rome,
   I read Ecclesiastes to the saintly Blesilla, [5385] so that I might
   provoke her to the contempt of this earthly scene, and to count as
   nothing all that she saw in the world; and that she asked me to throw
   my remarks upon all the more obscure passages into the form of a short
   commentary, so that, when I was absent, she might still understand what
   she read. She was withdrawn from us by her sudden death, while girding
   herself for our work; we were not counted worthy to have such an one as
   the partner of our life; and, therefore, Paula and Eustochium, I kept
   silence under the stroke of such a wound. But now, living as I do in
   the smaller community of Bethlehem, I pay what I owe to her memory and
   to you. I would only point out this, that I have followed no one's
   authority. I have translated direct from the Hebrew, adapting my words
   as much as possible to the form of the Septuagint, but only in those
   places in which they did not diverge far from the Hebrew. I have
   occasionally referred also to the versions of Aquila, Symmachus, and
   Theodotion, but so as not to alarm the zealous student by too many
   novelties, nor yet to let my commentary follow the side streams of
   opinion, turning aside, against my conscientious conviction, from the
   fountainhead of truth.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5385] Daughter of Paula. See Letter XXXIX.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Prefaces to the Vulgate Version of the New Testament.

   This version was made at Rome between the years 382 and 385. The only
   Preface remaining is that to the translation of the Gospels, but Jerome
   speaks of, and quotes from, his version of the other parts also. The
   work was undertaken at the request and under the sanction of Pope
   Damasus, who had consulted Jerome in a.d. 383 on certain points of
   Scriptural criticism, and apparently in the same year urged him to
   revise the current Latin version by help of the Greek original. It is
   to be observed that Jerome's aim was "to revise the old Latin, and not
   to make a new version. When Augustin expressed to him his gratitude for
   his translation of the Gospels,' he tacitly corrected him by
   substituting for this phrase the correction of the New Testament.' Yet,
   although he proposed to himself this limited object, the various forms
   of corruption which had been introduced were, as he describes, so
   numerous that the difference of the old and revised (Hieronymian) text
   is throughout clear and striking." See article by Westcott in
   "Dictionary of Bible," on the Vulgate, and Fremantle's article on
   Jerome in "Dictionary of Christian Biography."
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Four Gospels.

   Addressed to Pope [5386] Damasus, a.d. 383.

   You urge me to revise the old Latin version, and, as it were, to sit in
   judgment on the copies of the Scriptures which are now scattered
   throughout the whole world; and, inasmuch as they differ from one
   another, you would have me decide which of them agree with the Greek
   original. The labour is one of love, but at the same time both perilous
   and presumptuous; for in judging others I must be content to be judged
   by all; and how can I dare to change the language of the world in its
   hoary old age, and carry it back to the early days of its infancy? Is
   there a man, learned or unlearned, who will not, when he takes the
   volume into his hands, and perceives that what he reads does not suit
   his settled tastes, break out immediately into violent language, and
   call me a forger and a profane person for having the audacity to add
   anything to the ancient books, or to make any changes or corrections
   therein? Now there are two consoling reflections which enable me to
   bear the odium--in the first place, the command is given by you who are
   the supreme bishop; and secondly, even on the showing of those who
   revile us, readings at variance with the early copies cannot be right.
   For if we are to pin our faith to the Latin texts, it is for our
   opponents to tell us which; for there are almost as many forms of texts
   as there are copies. If, on the other hand, we are to glean the truth
   from a comparison of many, why not go back to the original Greek and
   correct the mistakes introduced by inaccurate translators, and the
   blundering alterations of confident but ignorant critics, and, further,
   all that has been inserted or changed by copyists more asleep than
   awake? I am not discussing the Old Testament, which was turned into
   Greek by the Seventy elders, and [5387] has reached us by a descent of
   three steps. I do not ask what [5388] Aquila and [5389] Symmachus
   think, or why [5390] Theodotion takes a middle course between the
   ancients and the moderns. I am willing to let that be the true
   translation which had apostolic approval. I am now speaking of the New
   Testament. This was undoubtedly composed in Greek, with the exception
   of the work of Matthew the Apostle, who was the first to commit to
   writing the Gospel of Christ, and who published his work in Judæa in
   Hebrew characters. We must confess that as we have it in our language
   it is marked by discrepancies, and now that the stream is distributed
   into different channels we must go back to the fountainhead. I pass
   over those manuscripts which are associated with the names of [5391]
   Lucian and Hesychius, and the authority of which is perversely
   maintained by a handful of disputatious persons. It is obvious that
   these writers could not amend anything in the Old Testament after the
   labours of the Seventy; and it was useless to correct the New, for
   versions of Scripture which already exist in the languages of many
   nations show that their additions are false. I therefore promise in
   this short Preface the four Gospels only, which are to be taken in the
   following order, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, as they have been revised
   by a comparison of the Greek manuscripts. Only early ones have been
   used. But to avoid any great divergences from the Latin which we are
   accustomed to read, I have used my pen with some restraint, and while I
   have corrected only such passages as seemed to convey a different
   meaning, I have allowed the rest to remain as they are.

   The Preface concludes with a description of lists of words made by
   Eusebius and translated by Jerome, designed to show what passages occur
   in two or more of the Gospels.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5386] Made pope 366, died 384. Jerome had been his secretary at the
   Council held at Rome in 382, and continued is literary services till
   the pope's death, in 385.

   [5387] That is, after being translated from Hebrew into Greek, and from
   Greek into Latin.

   [5388] Aquila belonged to the second century, but whether to the first
   half, or to the early part of the second half, cannot be determined. He
   was a Jewish proselyte, of Sinope in Pontus, and is supposed to have
   translated the books of the Old Testament into Greek in order to assist
   the Hellenistic Jews in their controversies with Christians. Jerome's
   estimate of him varied from time to time. In his commentary on Hos.
   ii., Is. xlix., and Letter XXVIII., etc., he treats him as worthy of
   credit. On the other hand, in the letter to Pammachius, De Opt. Gen.
   Interp. (LVII. 11), he describes him as contentiosus; but in Letter
   XXXVI. 12, he denies that he is such. In the preface to Job he speaks
   of Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion as "Judaising heretics, who by
   their deceitful translation have concealed many mysteries of
   salvation." The second edition of Aquila's version, which was extremely
   literal, was highly esteemed by the Jews, and was called by them the
   Hebrew verity. See Davidson's "Biblical Criticism," p. 215, etc.

   [5389] Symmachus was the author of the third Greek version. He is said
   to have been a Samaritan by birth. The date of his version cannot be
   accurately fixed; but, apparently, it appeared after Theodotion's. "He
   does not adhere to the text so closely as to render it verbatim into
   Greek; but chooses to express the same in perspicuous and intelligible
   language."--Davidson.

   [5390] Theodotion, the author of the second Greek version, was a native
   of Ephesus. His version is thought to have been made before 160. "The
   mode of translation adopted by him holds an intermediate place between
   the scrupulous literality of Aquila and the free interpretation of
   Symmachus," and his work was more highly valued by Christians than that
   of either Aquila or Symmachus. Daniel was read in his version in the
   churches (Pref. to Joshua).

   [5391] Lucian in Syria and Hesychius in Egypt attempted their
   recensions about the middle of the third century, the time when Origen
   also began to labour in the same direction. Lucian's recension, also
   called the Constantinopolitan, and to which the Slavonian and Gothic
   versions belong, spread over Asia Minor and Thrace. See the Preface to
   the Chronicles. It was decreed by a council held under Pope Gelasius,
   a.d. 494, that "the Gospels which Lucian and Hesychius falsified are
   apocryphal."
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   Prefaces to the Books of the Vulgate Version of the Old Testament.

   This version was not undertaken with ecclesiastical sanction as was the
   case with the Gospels, but at the request of private friends, or from
   Jerome's "own sense of the imperious necessity of the work." It was
   wholly made at Bethlehem, and was begun about a.d. 391, and finished
   about a.d. 404. The approximate dates of the several books are given
   before each Preface in the following pages.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Preface to Genesis.

   This Preface was addressed to Desiderius, but which of the three
   correspondents of Jerome who bore this name is uncertain (See Article
   Desiderius in Smith and Wace's "Dictionary of Christian Biography"). We
   do not give it because it has been given at length as a specimen of the
   rest, in Jerome's "Apology," book ii., vol. iii. of this series, pp.
   515-516. Jerome in it complains that he is accused of forging a new
   version. He justifies his undertaking by showing that in the versions
   then current many passages were left out (though they exist in our
   copies of the LXX.), such as "Out of Egypt" (Hos. xi. 1); "They shall
   look on him whom they pierced" (Zech. xii. 10), etc., which are quoted
   in the New Testament and are found in the Hebrew. He accounts for these
   omissions by the suggestion that the LXX. were afraid of offending
   Ptolemy Lagus for whom they worked, and who was a Platonist. He rejects
   the fable of the LXX. being shut up in separate cells and producing an
   identical version, and protests against the notion that they were
   inspired, and he urges his calumniators, by applying to those who knew
   Hebrew, to test the correctness of his version.

   There is no Preface to the other books of the Pentateuch. From the
   allusion to the work on the Pentateuch as lately finished, in the
   Preface to Joshua, which was published in 404, it is presumed that the
   date of the translation of the Pentateuch is 403.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Joshua, Judges, and Ruth.

   The Preface to these books was written a.d. 404; Jerome speaks of the
   death of Paula, which took place in that year, and the work is
   addressed to Eustochium alone. The Preface is chiefly occupied with a
   defence of his translation. He tells those who carp at it that they are
   not bound to read it, and mentions that the Church had given no final
   sanction to the LXX., but read the book of Daniel in Theodotion's
   version. The books of Joshua, Judges, and Ruth, were probably the last
   of the Vulgate translation; the Preface declares Jerome's intention of
   devoting himself henceforward to the Commentaries on the Prophets, a
   work which took up the remainder of his life.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Books of Samuel and Kings.

   This Preface was the first in order of publication. It was set forth as
   an exposition of the principles adopted by Jerome in all his
   translations from the Hebrew--the "Helmeted Preface," as he calls it in
   the beginning of the last paragraph, with which he was prepared to do
   battle against all who impugn his design and methods. It was addressed
   to Paula and Eustochium, and published about a.d. 391.

   That the Hebrews have twenty-two letters is testified by the Syrian and
   Chaldæan languages which are nearly related to the Hebrew, for they
   have twenty-two elementary sounds which are pronounced the same way,
   but are differently written. The Samaritans also employ just the same
   number of letters in their copies of the Pentateuch of Moses, and
   differ only in the shape and outline of the letters. And it is certain
   that Esdras, the scribe and teacher of the law, after the capture of
   Jerusalem and the restoration of the temple by Zerubbabel, invented
   [5392] other letters which we now use, although up to that time the
   Samaritan and Hebrew characters were the same. In the [5393] book of
   Numbers, also, where we have the census of the Levites and priests, the
   mystic teaching of Scripture conducts us to the same result. And we
   find the four-lettered name of the Lord in certain Greek books written
   to this day in the ancient characters. The thirty-seventh Psalm,
   moreover, the one hundred and eleventh, the one hundred and twelfth,
   the one hundred and nineteenth, and the one hundred and forty-fifth,
   although they are written in different metres, have for their [5394]
   acrostic framework an alphabet of the same number of letters. The
   Lamentations of Jeremiah, and his Prayer, the Proverbs of Solomon also,
   towards the end, from the place where we read "Who will find a brave
   woman?" are instances of the same number of letters forming the
   division into sections. And, again, five are double letters, viz.,
   Caph, Mem, Nun, Phe, Sade, for at the beginning and in the middle of
   words they are written one way, and at the end another way. Whence it
   happens that, by most people, five of the books are reckoned as double,
   viz., Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, Ezra, Jeremiah, with Kinoth, i.e., his
   Lamentations. As, then, there are twenty-two elementary characters by
   means of which we write in Hebrew all we say, and the compass of the
   human voice is contained within their limits, so we reckon twenty-two
   books, by which, as by the alphabet of the doctrine of God, a righteous
   man is instructed in tender infancy, and, as it were, while still at
   the breast.

   The first of these books is called Bresith, to which we give the name
   Genesis. The second, Elle Smoth, which bears the name Exodus; the
   third, Vaiecra, that is Leviticus; the fourth, Vaiedabber, which we
   call Numbers; the fifth, Elle Addabarim, which is entitled Deuteronomy.
   These are the five books of Moses, which they properly call [5395]
   Thorath, that is law.

   The second class is composed of the Prophets, and they begin with Jesus
   the son of Nave, who among them is called Joshua the son of Nun. Next
   in the series is Sophtim, that is the book of Judges; and in the same
   book they include Ruth, because the events narrated occurred in the
   days of the Judges. Then comes Samuel, which we call First and Second
   Kings. The fourth is Malachim, that is, Kings, which is contained in
   the third and fourth volumes of Kings. And it is far better to say
   Malachim, that is Kings, than Malachoth, that is Kingdoms. For the
   author does not describe the Kingdoms of many nations, but that of one
   people, the people of Israel, which is comprised in the twelve tribes.
   The fifth is Isaiah, the sixth, Jeremiah, the seventh, Ezekiel, the
   eighth is the book of the Twelve Prophets, which is called among the
   Jews [5396] Thare Asra.

   To the third class belong the Hagiographa, of which the first book
   begins with Job, the second with David, whose writings they divide into
   five parts and comprise in one volume of Psalms; the third is Solomon,
   in three books, Proverbs, which they call Parables, that is Masaloth,
   Ecclesiastes, that is Coeleth, the Song of Songs, which they denote by
   the title Sir Assirim; the sixth is Daniel; the seventh, Dabre Aiamim,
   that is, Words of Days, which we may more expressively call a chronicle
   of the whole of the sacred history, the book that amongst us is called
   First and Second [5397] Chronicles; the eighth, Ezra, which itself is
   likewise divided amongst Greeks and Latins into [5398] two books; the
   ninth is Esther.

   And so there are also twenty-two books of the Old Testament; that is,
   five of Moses, eight of the prophets, nine of the Hagiographa, though
   some include Ruth and Kinoth (Lamentations) amongst the Hagiographa,
   and think that these books ought to be reckoned separately; we should
   thus have twenty-four books of the old law. And these the Apocalypse of
   John represents by the twenty-four elders, who adore the Lamb, and with
   downcast looks offer their crowns, while in their presence stand the
   four living creatures with eyes before and behind, that is, looking to
   the past and the future, and with unwearied voice crying, Holy, Holy,
   Holy, Lord God Almighty, who wast, and art, and art to come.

   This preface to the Scriptures may serve as a "helmeted" introduction
   to all the books which we turn from Hebrew into Latin, so that we may
   be assured that what is not found in our list must be placed amongst
   the Apocryphal writings. Wisdom, therefore, which generally bears the
   name of Solomon, and the book of Jesus, the Son of Sirach, and Judith,
   and Tobias, and the Shepherd are not in the canon. The first book of
   Maccabees I have found to be Hebrew, the second is Greek, as can be
   proved from the very style. Seeing that all this is so, I beseech you,
   my reader, not to think that my labours are in any sense intended to
   disparage the old translators. For the service of the tabernacle of God
   each one offers what he can; some gold and silver and precious stones,
   others linen and blue and purple and scarlet; we shall do well if we
   offer skins and goats' hair. And yet the Apostle pronounces our more
   contemptible parts more necessary than others. Accordingly, the beauty
   of the tabernacle as a whole and in its several kinds (and the
   ornaments of the church present and future) was covered with skins and
   goats'-hair cloths, and the heat of the sun and the injurious rain were
   warded off by those things which are of less account. First read, then,
   my Samuel and Kings; mine, I say, mine. For whatever by diligent
   translation and by anxious emendation we have learnt and made our own,
   is ours. And when you understand that whereof you were before ignorant,
   either, if you are grateful, reckon me a translator, or, if ungrateful,
   a paraphraser, albeit I am not in the least conscious of having
   deviated from the Hebrew original. At all events, if you are
   incredulous, read the Greek and Latin manuscripts and compare them with
   these poor efforts of mine, and wherever you see they disagree, ask
   some Hebrew (though you ought rather to place confidence in me), and if
   he confirm our view, I suppose you will not think him a soothsayer and
   suppose that he and I have, in rendering the same passage, divined
   alike. But I ask you also, the [5399] handmaidens of Christ, who anoint
   the head of your reclining Lord with the most precious ointment of
   faith, who by no means seek the Saviour in the tomb, for whom Christ
   has long since ascended to the Father--I beg you to confront with the
   shields of your prayers the mad dogs who bark and rage against me, and
   go about the city, and think themselves learned if they disparage
   others. I, knowing my lowliness, will always remember what we are told.
   [5400] "I said, I will take heed to my ways that I offend not in my
   tongue. I have set a guard upon my mouth while the sinner standeth
   against me. I became dumb, and was humbled, and kept silence from good
   words."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5392] That is, the square character which was of Assyrian origin. As
   to how far the tradition is true, see Davidson's "Biblical Criticisms"
   (1854), p. 22, and the authorities there referred to.

   [5393] iii. 39. All the males from a month old and upwards are said to
   have been twenty-two thousand.

   [5394] These are the alphabetical Psalms which, being mainly didactic,
   were written acrostically to assist the memory. Others partially
   acrostic are ix., x., xxv., xxxiv., to make the alphabet complete in
   xxxvii. in verse 28 must be supposed to be represented by lrlm, and t
   in verse 39 by rtshych

   [5395] More correctly Torah.

   [5396] The laws or instructions of Ezra. By many of the Jews Ezra was
   regarded as the author of the Twelve Prophets.

   [5397] Jerome has in the text the Greek equivalent paraleipomenon .

   [5398] That is, Ezra and Nehemiah.

   [5399] Paula and Eustochium.

   [5400] Ps. xxxix. 2 sq.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Chronicles.

   This Preface is almost wholly a repetition of the arguments adduced in
   the Preface to Genesis. It is addressed to Chromatius, bishop of
   Aquileia, who took great interest in the work and provided funds for
   its continuance. The date is a.d. 395.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Ezra and Nehemiah.

   This Preface is addressed to Domnio (a Roman presbyter. See Letters L.,
   and XLVII. 3, Paulinus, Ep. 3) and Rogatianus, of whom nothing is
   known. It was written a.d. 394. It is a repetition of his constant
   ground of self-defence, and contains a noble expression of his
   determination to carry the work through. "The serpent may hiss, and

   "Victorious Sinon hurl his brand of fire,'

   but never shall my mouth be closed. Cut off my tongue; it will still
   stammer out something.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Esther.

   To Paula and Eustochium, early in 404. Merely assures them that he is
   acting as a faithful translator, adding nothing of his own; whereas in
   the version then in common use (vulgata), "the book is drawn out into
   all kinds of perplexing entanglements of language."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Job.

   This was put into circulation about the same time as the sixteen
   prophets, that is, about the year 393. It was written in 392. It has no
   dedication, but is full of personal interest, and shows the deplorable
   state in which the text of many parts of Scripture was before his time,
   thus justifying his boast, "I have rescued Job from the dunghill."

   I am compelled at every step in my treatment of the books of Holy
   Scripture to reply to the abuse of my opponents, who charge my
   translation with being a censure of the Seventy; as though Aquila among
   Greek authors, and Symmachus and Theodotion, had not rendered word for
   word, or paraphrased, or combined the two methods in a sort of
   translation which is neither the one nor the other; and as though
   Origen had not marked all the books of the Old Testament with obeli and
   asterisks, which he either introduced or adopted from Theodotion, and
   inserted in the old translation, thus showing that what he added was
   deficient in the older version. My detractors must therefore learn
   either to receive altogether what they have in part admitted, or they
   must erase my translation and at the same time their own asterisks. For
   they must allow that those translators who it is clear have left out
   numerous details, have erred in some points; especially in the book of
   Job, where, if you withdraw such passages as have been added and marked
   with asterisks, the greater part of the book will be cut away. This, at
   all events, will be so in Greek. On the other hand, previous to the
   publication of our recent translation with asterisks and obeli, about
   seven or eight hundred lines were missing in the Latin, so that the
   book, mutilated, torn, and disintegrated, exhibits its deformity to
   those who publicly read it. The present translation follows no ancient
   translator, but will be found to reproduce now the exact words, now the
   meaning, now both together of the original Hebrew, Arabic, and
   occasionally the Syriac. For an indirectness and a slipperiness
   attaches to the whole book, even in the Hebrew; and, as orators say in
   Greek, it [5401] is tricked out with figures of speech, and while it
   says one thing, it does another; just as if you close your hand to hold
   an eel or a little [5402] muræna, the more you squeeze it, the sooner
   it escapes. I remember that in order to understand this volume, I paid
   a not inconsiderable sum for the services of a teacher, a native of
   Lydda, who was amongst the Hebrews reckoned to be in the front rank;
   whether I profited at all by his teaching, I do not know; of this one
   thing I am sure, that I could translate only that which I previously
   understood. Well, then, from the beginning of the book to the words of
   Job, the Hebrew version is in prose. Further, from the words of Job
   where he says, [5403] "May the day perish wherein I was born, and the
   night in which it was said, a man-child is conceived," to the place
   where before the close of the book it is written [5404] "Therefore I
   blame myself and repent in dust and ashes," we have hexameter verses
   running in dactyl and spondee: and owing to the idiom of the language
   other feet are frequently introduced not containing the same number of
   syllables, but the same quantities. Sometimes, also, a sweet and
   musical rhythm is produced by the breaking up of the verses in
   accordance with the laws of metre, a fact better known to prosodists
   than to the ordinary reader. But from the aforesaid verse to the end of
   the book the small remaining section is a prose composition. And if it
   seem incredible to any one that the Hebrews really have metres, and
   that, whether we consider the Psalter or the Lamentations of Jeremiah,
   or almost all the songs of Scripture, they bear a resemblance to our
   Flaccus, and the Greek Pindar, and Alcæus, and Sappho, let him read
   Philo, Josephus, Origen, Eusebius of Cæsarea, and with the aid of their
   testimony he will find that I speak the truth. Wherefore, let my
   barking critics listen as I tell them that my motive in toiling at this
   book was not to censure the ancient translation, but that those
   passages in it which are obscure, or those which have been omitted, or
   at all events, through the fault of copyists have been corrupted, might
   have light thrown upon them by our translation; for we have some slight
   knowledge of Hebrew, and, as regards Latin, my life, almost from the
   cradle, has been spent in the company of grammarians, rhetoricians, and
   philosophers. But if, since the version of the Seventy was published,
   and even now, when the Gospel of Christ is beaming forth, the Jewish
   Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, judaising heretics, have been
   welcomed amongst the Greeks--heretics, who, by their deceitful
   translation, have concealed many mysteries of salvation, and yet, in
   the Hexapla are found in the Churches and are expounded by churchmen;
   ought not I, a Christian, born of Christian parents, and who carry the
   standard of the cross on my brow, and am zealous to recover what is
   lost, to correct what is corrupt, and to disclose in pure and faithful
   language the mysteries of the Church, ought not I, let me ask, much
   more to escape the reprobation of fastidious or malicious readers? Let
   those who will keep the old books with their gold and silver letters on
   purple skins, or, to follow the ordinary phrase, in "uncial
   characters," loads of writing rather than manuscripts, if only they
   will leave for me and mine, our poor pages and copies which are less
   remarkable for beauty than for accuracy. I have toiled to translate
   both the Greek versions of the Seventy, and the Hebrew which is the
   basis of my own, into Latin. Let every one choose which he likes, and
   [5405] he will find out that what he objects to in me, is the result of
   sound learning, not of malice.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5401] eschematismenos .

   [5402] A small fish well known to the ancients, but apparently not
   identified with any species known to us.

   [5403] Job iii. 3.

   [5404] xlii. 6.

   [5405] Reading studiosum me magis quam malevolum probet. Substituting
   se for me, according to some manuscripts, we must translate "and thus
   show that he is actuated more by a love of learning than by malice."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Psalms.

   Dedicated to Sophronius about the year 392. Jerome had, while at Rome,
   made a translation of the Psalms from the LXX., which he had afterwards
   corrected by collation with the Hebrew text (see the Preface addressed
   to Paula and Eustochium, infra). His friend Sophronius, in quoting the
   Psalms to the Jews, was constantly met with the reply, "It does not so
   stand in the Hebrew." He, therefore, urged Jerome to translate them
   direct from the original. Jerome, in presenting the translation to his
   friend, records the intention which he had expressed of translating the
   new Latin version into Greek. This we know was done by Sophronius, not
   only for the Psalms, but also for the rest of the Vulgate, and was
   valued by the Greeks (Apol. ii. 24, vol. iii. of this series, p. 515).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs.

   Dedicated to Chromatius and Heliodorus, a.d. 393. The Preface is
   important as showing the help given to Jerome by his friends, the
   rapidity of his work, and his view of the Apocrypha. We give the two
   chief passages.

   It is well that my letter should couple those who are coupled in the
   episcopate; and that I should not separate on paper those who are bound
   in one by the law of Christ. I would have written the commentaries on
   Hosea, Amos, Zechariah, and the Kings, which you ask of me, if I had
   not been prevented by illness. You give me comfort by the supplies you
   send me; you support my secretaries and copyists, so that the efforts
   of all my powers may be given to you. And then all at once comes a
   thick crowd of people with all sorts of demands, as if it was just that
   I should neglect your hunger and work for others, or as if, in the
   matter of giving and receiving, I had a debt to any one but you. And
   so, though I am broken by a long illness, yet, not to be altogether
   silent and dumb amongst you this year, I have dedicated to you three
   days' work, that is to say, the translation of the three books of
   Solomon.

   After speaking of the books of the Wisdom of Solomon and
   Ecclesiasticus, which were sent at the same time, the Preface
   continues:

   As, then, the Church reads Judith, Tobit, and the books of Maccabees,
   but does not admit them among the canonical Scriptures, so let it read
   these two volumes for the edification of the people, not to give
   authority to doctrines of the Church. If any one is better pleased with
   the edition of the Seventy, there it is, long since corrected by me.
   For it is not our aim in producing the new to destroy the old. And yet
   if our friend reads carefully, he will find that our version is the
   more intelligible, for it has not turned sour by being poured three
   times over into different vessels, but has been drawn straight from the
   press, and stored in a clean jar, and has thus preserved its own
   flavour.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah.

   Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, about a.d. 393. This Preface speaks
   of Isaiah as using the polished diction natural to a man of rank and
   refinement, as an Evangelist more than a prophet, and a poet rather
   than a prose writer. He then reiterates his defence of his translation,
   saying that now, "The Jews can no longer scoff at our Churches because
   of the falsity of our Scriptures."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Jeremiah and Ezekiel.

   Short Prefaces without dedication, but probably addressed to Paula and
   Eustochium, about a.d. 393.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel.

   The Preface is interesting as showing the difficulties caused by the
   incorporation of apocryphal matter into this book, the fact that
   Theodotion's version, not the LXX., was read in the Churches, and that
   the book was reckoned by the Jews not among the prophets but among the
   Hagiographa. It was addressed to Paula and Eustochium about a.d. 392.

   The Septuagint version of Daniel the prophet is not read by the
   Churches of our Lord and Saviour. They use Theodotion's version, but
   how this came to pass I cannot tell. Whether it be that the language is
   Chaldee, which differs in certain peculiarities from our speech, and
   the Seventy were unwilling to follow those deviations in a translation;
   or that the book was published in the name of the Seventy, by some one
   or other not familiar with Chaldee, or if there be some other reason, I
   know not; this one thing I can affirm--that it differs widely from the
   original, and is rightly rejected. For we must bear in mind that Daniel
   and Ezra, the former especially, were written in Hebrew letters, but in
   the Chaldee language, as was [5406] one section of Jeremiah; and,
   further, that Job has much affinity with Arabic. As for myself, when,
   in lily youth, after reading the flowery rhetoric of Quintilian and
   Tully, I entered on the vigorous study of this language, the
   expenditure of much time and energy barely enabled me to utter the
   puffing and hissing words; I seemed to be walking in a sort of
   underground chamber with a few scattered rays of light shining down
   upon me; and when at last I met with Daniel, such a sense of weariness
   came over me that, in a fit of despair, I could have counted all my
   former toil as useless. But there was a certain Hebrew who encouraged
   me, and was for ever quoting for my benefit the saying that "Persistent
   labour conquers all things"; and so, conscious that among Hebrews I was
   only a smatterer, I once more began to study Chaldee. And, to confess
   the truth, to this day I can read and understand Chaldee better than I
   can pronounce it. I say this to show you how hard it is to master the
   book of Daniel, which in Hebrew contains neither the history of
   Susanna, nor the hymn of the three youths, nor the fables of Bel and
   the Dragon; because, however, they are to be found everywhere, we have
   formed them into an appendix, prefixing to them an obelus, and thus
   making an end of them, so as not to seem to the uninformed to have cut
   off a large portion of the volume. I heard a certain Jewish teacher,
   when mocking at the history of Susanna, and saying that it was the
   fiction of some Greek or other, raise the same objection which
   Africanus brought against Origen--that these etymologies of [5407]
   schisai from [5408] schinos, and [5409] prisai from [5410] prinos, are
   to be traced to the Greek. To make the point clear to Latin readers: It
   is as if he were to say, playing upon the word ilex, illico pereas; or
   upon lentiscus, may the angel make a lentil of you, or may you perish
   nan lente, or may you lentus (that is pliant or compliant) be led to
   death, or anything else suiting the name of the tree. Then he would
   captiously maintain that the three youths in the furnace of raging fire
   had leisure enough to amuse themselves with making poetry, and to
   summon all the elements in turn to praise God. Or what was there
   miraculous, he would say, or what indication of divine inspiration, in
   the slaying of the dragon with a lump of pitch, or in frustrating the
   schemes of the priests of Bel? Such deeds were more the results of an
   able man's forethought than of a prophetic spirit. But when he came to
   [5411] Habakkuk and read that he was carried from Judæa into Chaldæa to
   bring a dish of food to Daniel, he asked where we found an instance in
   the whole of the Old Testament of any saint with an ordinary body
   flying through the air, and in a quarter of an hour traversing vast
   tracts of country. And when one of us who was rather too ready to speak
   adduced the instance of Ezekiel, and said that he was transported from
   Chaldæa into Judæa, he derided the man and proved from the book itself
   that Ezekiel, in spirit, saw himself carried over. And he argued that
   even our own Apostle, being an accomplished man and one who had been
   taught the law by Hebrews, had not dared to affirm that he was bodily
   rapt away, but had said: [5412] "Whether in the body, or out of the
   body, I know not; God knoweth." By these and similar arguments he used
   to refute the apocryphal fables in the Church's book. Leaving this for
   the reader to pronounce upon as he may think fit, I give warning that
   Daniel in Hebrew is not found among the prophets, but amongst the
   writers of the Hagiographa; for all Scripture is by them divided into
   three parts: the law, the Prophets, and the Hagiographa, which have
   respectively five, eight, and eleven books, a point which we cannot now
   discuss. But as to the objections which [5413] Porphyry raises against
   this prophet, or rather brings against the book, [5414] Methodius,
   Eusebius, and Apollinaris may be cited as witnesses, for they replied
   to his folly in many thousand lines of writing, whether with
   satisfaction to the curious reader I know not. Therefore, I beseech
   you, Paula and Eustochium, to pour out your supplications for me to the
   Lord, that so long as I am in this poor body, I may write something
   pleasing to you, useful to the Church, worthy of posterity. As for my
   contemporaries, I am indifferent to their opinions, for they pass from
   side to side as they are moved by love or hatred.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5406] x. 11.

   [5407] To split. The word has no sort of etymological connection with
   schinos. Susanna 54, 55, 58, 59. When the first elder says the crime
   was committed under a mastich tree (schinos), Daniel answers, "God
   shall cut thee in two" (schisei).

   [5408] The mastich tree.

   [5409] To saw.

   [5410] The holm-oak.

   [5411] In the LXX. the story of Bel and the Dragon bears a special
   heading as "part of the prophecy of Habakkuk."--Westcott. The angel is
   said to have carried Habakkuk with a dish of food in his hand for
   Daniel from Judæa to Babylon.

   [5412] 2 Cor. xii. 2.

   [5413] The bitter enemy of the Christian faith. Born at Tyre 223. Died
   at Rome about 304.

   [5414] Bishop of Patara in Lycia, and afterwards of Tyre. Suffered
   martyrdom 302 or 303.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Twelve Minor Prophets.

   This Preface, dedicated to Paula and Eustochium in a.d. 392, contains
   nothing of importance, merely mentioning the dates of a few of the
   prophets. and the fact that the Twelve Prophets were counted by the
   Hebrews as forming a single book.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Translations from the Septuagint and Chaldee.

   There are three stages of Jerome's work of Scripture Translation. The
   first is during his stay at Rome, a.d. 382-385, when he translated only
   from the Greek--the New Testament from the Greek mss., and the Book of
   Psalms from the LXX. The second is the period immediately after his
   settlement at Bethlehem, when he translated still from the LXX., but
   marked with obeli and asterisks the passages in which that version
   differed from the Hebrew: the third from a.d. 390-404, in which he
   translated directly from the Hebrew. The work of the second period is
   that which is now before us. The whole of the Old Testament was
   translated from the LXX. (see his Apology, book ii. c. 24), but most of
   it was lost during his lifetime (see Letters CXXXIV. (end) and CXVI. 34
   (in Augustin Letter, 62)). What remains is the Book of Job, the Psalms,
   Chronicles, the Books of Solomon, and Tobit and Judith.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Chronicles.

   This book was dedicated to [5415] Domnion and Rogatianus, about a.d.
   388. Jerome points out the advantages he enjoyed, in living in
   Palestine, for obtaining correct information on matters illustrative of
   Scripture, especially the names of places. The mss. of the LXX. on such
   points were so corrupt that occasionally three names were run into one,
   and "you would think that you had before you, not a heap of Hebrew
   names, but those of some foreign and Sarmatian tribe." Jerome had sent
   for a Jew, highly esteemed among his brethren, from Tiberias, and,
   after "examining him from top to toe," had, by his aid, emended the
   text and made the translation. But he had not the critical knowledge to
   guard him against supposing that the Books of Chronicles are "the Book
   of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah," referred to in the Books of
   Kings.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5415] See Preface to Ezra (Vulgate).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book of Job.

   This translation was dedicated to Paula and Eustochium, about the year
   388. He complains that even the revision he was now making was the
   subject of many cavils. Men prefer ancient faults to new truths, and
   would rather have handsome copies than correct ones; but he boasts that
   "the blessed Job, who, as far as the Latins are concerned, was till now
   lying amidst filth and swarming with the worms of error, is now whole
   and free from stain."
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Psalms.

   Jerome first undertook a revision of the Psalter with the help of the
   Septuagint about the year 383, when living at Rome. This revision,
   which obtained the name of the Roman Psalter "probably because it was
   made for the use of the Roman Church at the request of Damasus," was
   retained until the pontificate of Pius V. (a.d. 1566). Before long "the
   old error prevailed over the new correction," the faults of the old
   version crept in again through the negligence of copyists; and at the
   request of Paula and Eustochium, Jerome commenced a new and more
   thorough revision. The exact date is not known; the work was in all
   probability done at Bethlehem in the years 387 and 388. This edition,
   which soon became popular, was introduced by Gregory of Tours into the
   services of the Church of France, and thus obtained the name of the
   Gallican Psalter. In 1566 it superseded the Roman in all churches
   except those of the Vatican, Milan, and St. Mark's, Venice.

   Long ago, when I was living at Rome, I revised the Psalter, and
   corrected it in a great measure, though but cursorily, in accordance
   with the Septuagint version. You now find it, Paula and Eustochium,
   again corrupted through the fault of copyists, and realise the fact
   that ancient error is more powerful than modern correction; and you
   therefore urge me, as it were, to cross-plough the land which has
   already been broken up, and, by means of the transverse furrows, to
   root out the thorns which are beginning to spring again; it is only
   right, you say, that rank and noxious growths should be cut down as
   often as they appear. And so I issue my customary admonition by way of
   preface both to you, for whom it happens that I am undertaking the
   labour, and to those persons who desire to have copies such as I
   describe. Pray see that what I have carefully revised be transcribed
   with similar painstaking care. Every reader can observe for himself
   where there is placed either a horizontal line or mark issuing from the
   centre, that is, either an obelus () or an asterisk (*). And wherever
   he sees the former, he is to understand that between this mark and the
   two stops (:) which I have introduced, the Septuagint translation
   contains superfluous matter. But where he sees the asterisk (*), an
   addition to the Hebrew books is indicated, which also goes as far as
   the two stops.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Books of Solomon.

   This is addressed to Paula and Eustochium. Jerome describes the
   numerous emendations he has had to make in what was then the received
   Latin text, but says he has not found the same necessity in dealing
   with Ecclesiasticus. He adds, "All I aim at is to give you a revised
   edition of the Canonical Scriptures, and to employ my Latin on what is
   certain rather than on what is doubtful."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Tobit and Judith.

   The Preface is to Chromatius and Heliodorus. It recognizes that the
   books are apocryphal. After his usual complaints of "the Pharisees" who
   impugned his translations, he says: "Inasmuch as the Chaldee is closely
   allied to the Hebrew, I procured the help of the most skilful speaker
   of both languages I could find, and gave to the subject one day's hasty
   labour, my method being to explain in Latin, with the aid of a
   secretary, whatever an interpreter expressed to me in Hebrew words." As
   to Judith, he notes that the Council of Nicæa had, contrary to the
   Hebrew tradition, included it in the Canon of Scripture, and this, with
   his friends' requests, had induced him to undertake the labour of
   emendation and translation.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Commentaries.

   The extant commentaries by Jerome on the books of Holy Scripture may be
   arranged thus, chronological sequence being observed as far as
   possible:

   A. New Testament:

   The Epistles to Philemon, Galatians, Ephesians, Titus. a.d. 387.

   Origen on St. Luke. a.d. 389.

   St. Matthew. a.d. 398.

   B. Old Testament:

   Ecclesiastes. a.d. 388.

   1. The Twelve Minor Prophets:

   Nahum, Michah, Zephaniah, Haggai, Habakkuk. a.d. 392.

   Jonah. Begun three years after the foregoing (Preface). Finished
   between a.d. 395 and a.d. 397.

   Obadiah. a.d. 403.

   Zechariah, Malachi, Hosea, Joel, Amos. Finished by a.d. 406.

   2. The Four Greater Prophets:

   Daniel. a.d. 407.

   Isaiah. a.d. 408-410.

   Ezekiel. a.d. 410-414.

   Jeremiah. Commenced after the death of Eustochium in a.d. 418. The
   commentary on this book, which stops short at chapter xxxii., was
   therefore written in a.d. 419, the year which intervened between
   Eustochium's death and Jerome's own.

   We have thought it best to give the Prefaces, as in those to the
   Vulgate, in the order of the books as they stand in our Bible, not in
   the order in which they were written.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Matthew.

   The Preface, addressed to Eusebius of Cremona, was written a.d. 398.
   Eusebius was at this time starting for Rome, and he was charged to give
   a copy of this Commentary to Principia, the friend of Marcella, for
   whom he had been unable through sickness to write on the Song of Songs
   as he had wished. Jerome begins by distinguishing the Canonical from
   the Apocryphal Gospels, quoting the words of St. Luke, that many had
   taken in hand to write the life of Christ. He gives his view of the
   origin of the Gospels as follows:

   The first evangelist is Matthew, the publican, who was surnamed Levi.
   He published his Gospel in Judæa in the Hebrew language, chiefly for
   the sake of Jewish believers in Christ, who adhered in vain to the
   shadow of the law, although the substance of the Gospel had come. The
   second is Mark, the [5416] amanuensis of the Apostle Peter, and first
   bishop of the Church of Alexandria. He did not himself see our Lord and
   Saviour, but he related the matter of his Master's preaching with more
   regard to minute detail than to historical sequence. The third is Luke,
   the physician, by birth a native of Antioch, in Syria, whose praise is
   in the Gospel. He was himself a disciple of the Apostle Paul, and
   composed his book in Achaia and Boeotia. He thoroughly investigates
   certain particulars and, as he himself confesses in the preface,
   describes what he had heard rather than what he had seen. The last is
   John, the Apostle and Evangelist, whom Jesus loved most, who, reclining
   on the Lord's bosom, drank the purest streams of doctrine, and was the
   only one thought worthy of the words from the cross, "Behold! thy
   mother." When he was in Asia, at the time when the seeds of heresy were
   springing up (I refer to Cerinthus, Ebion, and the rest who say that
   Christ has not come in the flesh, whom he in his own epistle calls
   Antichrists, and whom the Apostle Paul frequently assails), he was
   urged by almost all the bishops of Asia then living, and by deputations
   from many Churches, to write more profoundly concerning the divinity of
   the Saviour, and to break through all obstacles so as to attain to the
   very Word of God (if I may so speak) with a boldness as successful as
   it appears audacious. Ecclesiastical history relates that, when he was
   urged by the brethren to write, he replied that he would do so if a
   general fast were proclaimed and all would offer up prayer to God; and
   when the fast was over, the narrative goes on to say, being filled with
   revelation, he burst into the heaven-sent Preface: "In the beginning
   was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God: this was
   in the beginning with God."

   Jerome then applies the four symbolical figures of Ezekiel to the
   Gospels: the Man is Matthew, the Lion, Mark, the Calf, Luke, "because
   he began with Zacharias the priest," and the Eagle, John. He then
   describes the works of his predecessors: Origen with his twenty-five
   volumes, Theophilus of Antioch, Hippolytus the martyr, Theodorus of
   Heraclea, Apollinaris of Laodicæa, Didymus of Alexandria, and of the
   Latins, Hilary, Victorinus, and Fortunatianus; from these last, he
   says, he had gained but little. He continues as follows:

   But you urge me to finish the composition in a fortnight, when Easter
   is now rapidly approaching, and the spring breezes are blowing; you do
   not consider when the shorthand writers are to take notes, when the
   sheets are to be written, when corrected, how long it takes to make a
   really accurate copy; and this is the more surprising, since you know
   that for the last three months I have been so ill that I am now hardly
   beginning to walk; and I could not adequately perform so great a task
   in so short a time. Therefore, neglecting the authority of ancient
   writers, since I have no opportunity of reading or following them, I
   have confined myself to the brief exposition and translation of the
   narrative which you particularly requested; and I have sometimes thrown
   in a few of the flowers of the [5417] spiritual interpretation, while I
   reserve the perfect work for a future day.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5416] Interpres.

   [5417] That is, the allegorical or mystical sense.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Preface to Translation of Origen on St. Luke.

   Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 388.

   A few days ago you told me that you had read some commentaries on
   Matthew and Luke, of which one was equally dull in perception and
   expression, the other frivolous in expression, sleepy in sense.
   Accordingly you requested me to translate, without regarding such
   rubbish, our Adamantius' thirty-nine "homilies" on Luke, just as they
   are found in the original Greek; I replied that it was an irksome task
   and a mental torment to write, as Cicero phrases it, with another man's
   heart [5418] not one's own; but yet I will undertake it, as your
   requests reach no higher than this. The demand which the sainted
   Blesilla once made, at Rome, that I should translate into our language
   his twenty-five volumes on Matthew, five on Luke, and thirty-two on
   John is beyond my powers, my leisure, and my energy. You see what
   weight your influence and wishes have with me. I have laid aside for a
   time my books on Hebrew Questions because you think my labour will not
   be in vain, and turn to the translation of these commentaries, which,
   good or bad, are his work and not mine. I do this all the more readily
   because I hear on the left of me the raven--that ominous bird--croaking
   and mocking in all extraordinary way at the colours of all the other
   birds, though he himself is nothing if not a bird of gloom. And so,
   before he change his note, I confess that in these treatises Origen is
   like a boy amusing himself with the dice-box; there is a wide
   difference between his mature efforts and the serious studies of his
   old age. If my proposal meet with your approbation, if I am still able
   to undertake the task, and if the Lord grant me opportunity to
   translate them into Latin after completing the work I have now
   deferred, you will then be able to see--aye, and all who speak Latin
   will learn through you--how much good they knew not, and how much they
   have now begun to know. Besides this, I have arranged to send you
   shortly the Commentaries of Hilary, that master of eloquence, and of
   the blessed martyr Victorinus, on the Gospel of Matthew. Their style is
   different, but the grace of the Spirit which wrought in them is one.
   These will give you some idea of the study which our Latins also have,
   in former days, bestowed upon the Holy Scriptures.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5418] Alieno stomacho.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Galatians.

   The Commentary is in three books, with full Prefaces.

   Book I., Ch. i. 1-iii. 9.

   Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 387.

   The Preface to this book begins with a striking description of the
   noble Roman lady Albina, which is as follows:

   Only a few days have elapsed since, having finished my exposition of
   the Epistle of Paul to Philemon, I had passed to Galatians, turning my
   course backwards and passing over many intervening subjects. But all at
   once letters unexpectedly arrived from Rome with the news that the
   venerable Albina has been recalled to the presence of the Lord, and
   that the saintly Marcella, bereft of the company of her mother, demands
   more than ever such solace as you can give, my dear Paula and
   Eustochium. This for the present is impossible on account of the great
   distance to be traversed by sea and land, and I could, therefore, wish
   to apply to the wound so suddenly inflicted at least the healing virtue
   of Scripture. I know full well her zeal and faith; I know how brightly
   the fire burns in her bosom, how she rises superior to her sex, and
   soars so far above human nature itself, that she crosses the Red Sea of
   this world, sounding the loud timbrel of the inspired volumes.
   Certainly, when I was at Rome, she never saw me for ever so short a
   time without putting some question to me respecting the Scriptures, and
   she did not, like the Pythagoreans, accept the "Ipse dixit" of her
   teacher, nor did authority, unsupported by the verdict of reason,
   influence her; but she tested all things, and weighed the whole matter
   so sagaciously that I perceived I had not a disciple so much as a
   judge. And so, believing that my labours would be most acceptable to
   her who is at a distance, and profitable for you who are with me here,
   I will approach a work unattempted by any writers in our language
   before me, and which scarcely any of the Greeks themselves have handled
   in a manner worthy of the dignity of the subject.

   Jerome then speaks of Victorinus, who had published a commentary on St.
   Paul, but "was busily engaged with secular literature and knew nothing
   of the Scriptures," and of the great Greek writers, Origen, [5419]
   Didymus, and [5420] Appolinaris, Eusebius of Emessa, and Theodorus of
   Heraclea, and says he has plucked flowers out of their gardens, so that
   the Commentary is more theirs than his. The expository part of the
   Preface is chiefly remarkable as giving the view of St. Paul's rebuke
   of St. Peter in Galatians ii., which occasioned the controversy between
   Jerome and Augustin. Jerome says:

   Paul does not go straight to the point, but is like a man walking in
   secret passages: his object is to exhibit Peter as doing what was
   expedient for the people of the circumcision committed to him, since,
   if a too sudden revolt took place from their ancient mode of life, they
   might be offended and not believe in the Cross; he wished, moreover, to
   show, inasmuch as the evangelisation of the Gentiles had been entrusted
   to himself that he had justice on his side in defending as true that
   which another only pretended was a dispensation. That wretch Porphyry
   [5421] Bataneotes by no means understood this, and, therefore, in the
   first book of the work which he wrote against us, he raised the
   objection that Peter was rebuked by Paul for not walking uprightly as
   an evangelical teacher. His desire was to brand the former with error
   and the latter with impudence, and to bring against us as a body the
   charge of erroneous notions and false doctrine, on the ground that the
   leaders of the Churches are at variance among themselves.

   In the Preface to Book II. Jerome describes the origin of the Galatians
   as a Gaulish tribe settled in Asia; but he takes them as slow of
   understanding, and says that the Gauls still preserve this character,
   just as the Roman Church preserves the character for which it was
   praised by St. Paul, for it still has crowds frequenting its churches
   and the tombs of its martyrs, and "nowhere else does the Amen resound
   so loudly, like spiritual thunder, and shake the temples of the idols";
   and similarly the traits of the churches of Corinth and Thessalonica
   are still preserved; in the first, the looseness of behaviour and of
   doctrine, and the conceit of worldly knowledge; in the second, the love
   of the brethren side by side with the disorderly conduct of busybodies.
   And he speaks of the condition of Galatia in his own day as follows:

   Any one who has seen by how many schisms Ancyra, the metropolis of
   Galatia, is rent and torn, and by how many differences and false
   doctrines the place is debauched, knows this as well as I do. I say
   nothing of [5422] Cataphrygians, [5423] Ophites, Borborites, and
   Manichæans; for these are familiar names of human woe. Who ever heard
   of Passaloryncitæ, and [5424] Ascodrobi, and [5425] Artotyritæ, and
   other portents--I can hardly call them names--in any part of the Roman
   Empire? The traces of the ancient foolishness remain to this day. One
   remark I must make, and so fulfil the promise with which I started.
   While the Galatians, in common with the whole East, speak Greek, their
   own language is almost identical with that of the [5426] Treviri; and
   if through contact with the Greek they have acquired a few corruptions,
   it is a matter of no moment. The Africans have to some extent changed
   the Phenician language, and Latin itself is daily undergoing changes
   through differences of place and time.

   The Preface to Book III. opens with the following passage, describing,
   in contrast with his own simple exposition, the arts of the preachers
   of his day.

   We are now busily occupied with our third book on Galatians, and, my
   friends, Paula and Eustochium, we are well aware of our weakness, and
   are conscious that our slender ability flows in but a small stream and
   makes little roar and rattle. For these are the qualities (to such a
   pass have we come) which are now expected even in the Churches; the
   simplicity and purity of apostolic language is neglected; we meet as if
   we were in the [5427] Athenæum, or the lecture rooms, to kindle the
   applause of the bystanders; what is now required is a discourse painted
   and tricked out with spurious rhetorical skill, and which, like a
   strumpet in the streets, does not aim at instructing the public, but at
   winning their favour; like a psaltery or a sweet-sounding lute, it must
   soothe the ears of the audience; and the passage of the prophet Ezekiel
   is suitable for our times, where the Lord says to him, "Thou art become
   unto them as the sound of a pleasant lute which is well made, for they
   hear thy words but do them not."

   Jerome then speaks of the composition of his commentaries as follows:

   How far I have profited by my unflagging study of Hebrew I leave to
   others to decide; what I have lost in my own language, I can tell. In
   addition to this, on account of the weakness of my eyes and bodily
   infirmity generally, I do not write with my own hand; and I cannot make
   up for my slowness of utterance by greater pains and diligence, as is
   said to have been the case with Virgil, of whom it is related that he
   treated his books as a bear treats her cubs, and licked them into
   shape. I must summon a secretary, and either say whatever comes
   uppermost; or, if I wish to think a little and hope to produce
   something superior, my helper silently reproves me, clenches his fist,
   wrinkles his brow, and plainly declares by his whole bearing that he
   has come for nothing.

   He then points out how the Scriptures have dispossessed the great
   writers of the pre-Christian world.

   How few there are who now read Aristotle. How many are there who know
   the books, or even the name of Plato? You may find here and there a few
   old men, who have nothing else to do, who study them in a corner.
   [5428] But the whole world speaks the language of our Christian
   peasants and fishermen, the whole world re-echoes their words. And so
   their simple words must be set forth with simplicity of style; for the
   word simple applies to their words, not their meaning. But if, in
   response to your prayers, I could, in expounding their epistles, have
   the same spirit which they had when they dictated them, you would then
   see in the Apostles as much majesty and breadth of true wisdom as there
   is arrogance and vanity in the learned men of the world. To make a
   brief confession of the secrets of my heart, I should not like any one
   who wished to understand the Apostle to find a difficulty in
   understanding my writings, and so be compelled to find some one to
   interpret the interpreter.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5419] Didymus, the blind teacher of Alexandria.

   [5420] He became bishop of Laodicea about 362. About 376 his followers
   became a sect, and about the same time he set up bishops of his own at
   Antioch and elsewhere.

   [5421] Probably from Batanea, the ancient Bashan, where Porphyry is
   said to have been born.

   [5422] "The patriarch (of the Montanists) resided at Pepuza, a small
   town or village in Phrygia, to which the sectaries gave the mystical
   name of Jerusalem, as believing that it would be the seat of the
   Millennial Kingdom, which was the chief subject of their hopes. Hence
   they derived the names of Pepuzians and Cataphrygians."--Robertson, Ch.
   Hist., vol. i. p. 76.

   [5423] The Ophites, who took their name from ophis, a serpent, supposed
   the serpent of Genesis iii. to have been either the Divine Wisdom or
   the Christ Himself, come to set men free from the ignorance in which
   the Demiurge wished to keep them. The sect began in the second century
   and lasted until the sixth.

   [5424] The Ben. editor prefers the form Tascodrogi, and states that it
   is the Phrygian or Galatian equivalent for Passaloryncitæ. The sect is
   said to have been so called from their habit of putting the finger to
   the nose when praying.

   [5425] Heretics who made offerings of bread and cheese (arto-turos.
   Arto-tyros).--Aug. de Hæres, No. 28.

   [5426] The people who lived between the Moselle and the Forest of
   Ardennes in and about the modern Treves.

   [5427] The Athenæum was the name specially given to a school founded by
   the Emperor Hadrian at Rome, about a.d. 133, for the promotion of
   literary and scientific studies. The word denoted in general any place
   consecrated to the goddess Athena.

   [5428] Angulis. So. Cic. Rep. i. 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Ephesians.

   This Commentary was specially prized by Jerome as exhibiting his true
   views (Letter LXXXIV. 2), and they became in consequence one of the
   chief subjects of controversy between him and Rufinus, who traced in
   them, not unjustly, the influence of Origen. It was written immediately
   after that on the Epistle to the Galatians, in a.d. 387, and, like
   that, addressed to Paula and Eustochium. In the Preface to Book i.
   Jerome defends himself against various accusations. He declares that he
   has been, in the main, his own instructor, but yet that he has
   constantly consulted others as to Scriptural difficulties, and that he
   had, not long before, been to Alexandria to consult Didymus. "I
   questioned him about everything which was not clear to me in the whole
   range of Scripture." As to his indebtedness to Origen, he speaks as
   follows, certainly not blaming his doctrines: "I remark in the
   Prefaces, for your information, that Origen composed three volumes on
   this Epistle, and I have partly followed him. Apollinaris and Didymus
   also published some commentaries, and, though we have gleaned a few
   things from them, we have added or omitted such as we thought fit. The
   studious reader will, therefore, understand at the outset that this
   work is partly my own, and that I am in part indebted to others." The
   Preface to Books ii. and iii. is short. It speaks in praise of
   Marcella, who had invited him to his task, and declares that he in his
   monastery could not accomplish as much as that noble woman amidst the
   cares of her household. "I beseech you," he says, "to bear in mind that
   the language of this publication has not been long thought over or
   highly polished. In revealing the mysteries of Scripture I use almost
   the language of the street, and sometimes get through a thousand lines
   a day, in order that the explanation of the Apostle which I have begun
   may be completed with the aid of the prayers of Paul himself, whose
   Epistles I am endeavouring to explain."
     __________________________________________________________________

   Philemon.

   Written for Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 387. The Preface is a defence of
   the genuineness of the Epistle against those who thought its subject
   beneath the dignity of inspiration. "There are many degrees of
   inspiration," Jerome says, "though in Christ alone it is seen in its
   fulness." Many of the other Epistles touch upon small affairs of life,
   like the cloak left at Troas. To suppose that common life is separate
   from God is Manichæanism. Jerome mentions that Marcion, who altered
   many of the Epistles, did not touch that of Philemon; and brevity in a
   document which has in it so much of the beauty of the Gospel is a mark
   of its inspiration.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Titus.

   Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 387. The Preface speaks of the
   rejection of the Epistle by Marcion and Basilides, its acceptance by
   Tatius, but without assigning reasons. It ought, Jerome says, to be of
   special interest to Paula and Eustochium, as being written from
   Nicopolis, near Actium, where their property lay.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Isaiah.

   The Commentary in eighteen books, each with its Preface. It was written
   in the years 404-410, and addressed to Eustochium alone, her mother
   Paula having died in 404.

   The Preface to Book i. touches generally upon the character and
   contents of Isaiah, asserting that many of the prophecies are directly
   applicable to Christ, and that the nations who are dealt with have a
   spiritual meaning. Those to the following books mostly give a short
   statement of the contents of the chapters commented on, and entreat the
   prayers of Eustochium for the work. The Fifth Book (or chapters xiii.
   to xxiii.) had been published before by itself, at the instance of a
   bishop named Amabilis, but he says he must add the metaphorical and
   spiritual meaning of the Visions of the various nations, which is done
   in Books vi. and vii. The Preface to Book x. contains a bitter allusion
   to Rufinus, "the Scorpion, a dumb and poisonous brute, still grumbling
   over my former reply," and speaks of Pammachius as joining in the
   request for the continuation of the Commentaries.

   The Preface to Book xi. intimates that his commentary upon Daniel,
   which expounded the statue with feet of iron and clay as the Roman
   Empire, and announced its fall, had been known at the court and
   resented by Stilicho, but that all danger from that source had been
   removed by the judgment of God, that is, through the death of Stilicho
   by the command of his son in-law Honorius. The Preface to Book xiii.
   records a severe illness which had stopped his work, though he was
   restored to health suddenly; and that to Book xiv. thanks Eustochium
   for her kind offices during this illness. The remaining Prefaces,
   though they have occasionally some interest in the history of the
   interpretation of Scripture, need not delay us.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Jeremiah.

   The Commentary on Jeremiah is in six books; but Jerome did not live to
   finish it. It was written between the years 317 and 319, but only
   extends to chapter xxxii. It was dedicated to Eusebius of Cremona. The
   Prefaces, which are full of vigour, contain many allusions to the
   events and controversies of the last years of Jerome's life. In the
   Preface to Book i., after speaking of the Book of Daniel and the
   apocryphal Letter of Jeremiah as not belonging to the prophet's
   writings, he continues:

   I pay little heed to the ravings of disparaging critics who revile not
   only my words, but the very syllables of my words, and suppose they
   give evidence of some little knowledge if they discredit another man's
   work, as was exemplified in that [5429] ignorant traducer who lately
   broke out, and thought it worth his while to censure my commentaries on
   Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians. He does not understand the rules of
   commenting (for he is more asleep than awake and seems utterly dazed),
   and is not aware that in our books we give the opinions of many
   different writers, the authors' names being either expressed or
   understood, so that it is open to the reader to decide which he may
   prefer to adopt; although I must add that, in my Preface to the First
   Book of that work, I gave fair notice that my remarks would be partly
   my own, partly those of other commentators, and that thus the
   commentary would be the work conjointly of the ancient writers and of
   myself. [5430] Grunnius, his precursor, overlooked the same fact, and
   once upon a time did his best to cavil. I replied to him in two books,
   and there I cleared away the objections which he adduced in his own
   name, though the real traducer was some one else; to say nothing of my
   treatises against Jovinianus where, you may remember, I show that he
   (Jovinianus) laments that virginity is preferred to marriage, single
   marriage to digamy, digamy to polygamy. The stupid fool, [5431]
   labouring under his load of Scotch porridge, does not recollect that we
   said, in that very work, "I do not condemn the twice married, nor the
   thrice married, and, if it so be, the eight times married; I will go a
   step farther, and say that I welcome even a penitent whoremonger; for
   things equally lawful must be weighed in an even balance." Let him read
   the Apology [5432] for the same work which was directed against his
   [5433] master, and was received by Rome with acclamation many years
   ago. He will then observe that his revilings are but the echoes of
   other men's voices, and that his ignorance is so deep that even his
   abuse is not his own, but that he employs against us the ravings of
   foes long since dead and buried.

   The Preface to Book ii. is short and contains nothing of special
   importance. In that to Book iii. Jerome declares that he will, like
   Ulysses with the Sirens, close his ears to the adversary. The devil,
   who once spoke through Jovinianus, "now barks through the hound of
   Albion (Pelagius), who is like a mountain of fat, and whose fury is
   more in his heels than in his teeth; for his offspring is among the
   Scots, in the neighbourhood of Britain; and, according to the fables of
   the poet, he must, like Cerberus, be smitten to death with a spiritual
   club, that, in company with his master Pluto, he may forever hold his
   peace."

   In the Preface to Book iv. Jerome says he has been hindered in his work
   by the harassing of the Pelagian controversy. He regards Pelagius as
   reproducing the doctrines of impassibility and sinlessness taught by
   Pythagoras and Zeno, and revived by Origen, Rufinus, Evagrius Ponticus,
   and Jovinian. Their doctrines, he says, were promulgated chiefly in
   Sicily, Rhodes, and other islands; they were propagated secretly, and
   denied in public. They were full of malice, but were but dumb dogs, and
   were refuted in "certain writings," probably those of Augustin; but he
   declares his intention of writing against them, which he did in his
   anti-Pelagian Dialogue.

   The Prefaces to Books v. and vi. contain nothing noteworthy.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5429] Pelagius.

   [5430] That is, Rufinus. See Preface to Book xii. of Isaiah, where
   Rufinus is called Grunnius Corocotta Porcellus, and Preface to Book iv.
   of Jeremiah.

   [5431] Scotorum pultibus prægravatus. The words have been translated
   "made fat with Scotch flummery" (Stillingfleet). Another rendering is,
   "having his belly filled and his head bedulled with Scotch porridge"
   (Wall on Infant Baptism, pt. i. c. 19, § 3). Some think the words refer
   to Celestius, Pelagius' supporter.

   [5432] The letter to Pammachius (Jer. Letter XLVIII.) in defence of the
   book against Jovinianus.

   [5433] Jovinian was condemned in a Synod at Rome about 390. Thirty
   years had thus passed since the events occurred to which Jerome refers.
   See Preface to the treatise against Jovinian.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Ezekiel.

   The Commentary on Ezekiel is in fourteen Books. It was dedicated to
   Eustochium, and was written between the years 410 and 414. The Prefaces
   gain a special interest from their descriptions of the sack of Rome by
   Alaric and the consequent immigration into Palestine. We give several
   passages.

   In Preface to Book i.

   Having completed the eighteen books of the exposition of Isaiah, I was
   very desirous, Eustochium, Christ's virgin, to go on to Ezekiel, in
   accordance with my frequent promises to you and your mother Paula, of
   saintly memory, and thus, as the saying is, put the finishing touches
   to the work on the prophets; but alas! intelligence was suddenly
   brought me of the death of Pammachius and [5434] Marcella, [5435] the
   siege of Rome, and the falling asleep of many of my brethren and
   sisters. I was so stupefied and dismayed that day and night I could
   think of nothing but the welfare of the community; it seemed as though
   I was sharing the captivity of the saints, and I could not open my lips
   until I knew something more definite; and all the while, full of
   anxiety, I was wavering between hope and despair, and was torturing
   myself with the misfortunes of other people. But when the bright light
   of all the world was put out, or, rather, when the Roman Empire was
   decapitated, and, to speak more correctly, the whole world perished in
   one city, [5436] "I became dumb and humbled myself, and kept silence
   from good words, but my grief broke out afresh, my heart glowed within
   me, and while I meditated the fire was kindled;" and I thought I ought
   not to disregard the saying, [5437] "An untimely story is like music in
   a time of grief." But seeing that you persist in making this request,
   and a wound, though deep, heals by degrees; and [5438] the scorpion
   lies beneath the ground with [5439] Enceladus and Porphyrion, and the
   many-headed Hydra has at length ceased to hiss at us; and since
   opportunity has been given me which I ought to use, not for replying to
   insidious heretics, but for devoting myself to the exposition of
   Scripture, I will resume my work upon the prophet Ezekiel.

   Book ii. has, instead of a Preface, merely a line calling the attention
   of Eustochium to its opening words.

   The Preface to Book iii. has a noteworthy passage on the sack of Rome
   and its results.

   Who would believe that Rome, built up by the conquest of the whole
   world, had collapsed, that the mother of nations had become also their
   tomb; that the shores of the whole East, of Egypt, of Africa, which
   once belonged to the imperial city, were filled with the hosts of her
   men-servants and maid-servants, that we should every day be receiving
   in this holy Bethlehem men and women who once were noble and abounding
   in every kind of wealth but are now reduced to poverty? We cannot
   relieve these sufferers: all we can do is to sympathise with them, and
   unite our tears with theirs. The burden of this holy work was as much
   as we could carry; the sight of the wanderers, coming in crowds, caused
   us deep pain; and we therefore abandoned the exposition of Ezekiel, and
   almost all study, and were filled with a longing to turn the words of
   Scripture into action, and not to say holy things but to do them. Now,
   however, in response to your admonition, Eustochium, Christ's virgin,
   we resume the interrupted labour, and approach our third Book.

   The Prefaces to Books iv., v., and vi. contain nothing remarkable. The
   following is the important part of the Preface to Book vii.

   There is not a single hour, nor a single moment, in which we are not
   relieving crowds of brethren, and the quiet of the monastery has been
   changed into the bustle of a guest house. And so much is this the case
   that we must either close our doors, or abandon the study of the
   Scriptures on which we depend for keeping the doors open. And so,
   turning to profit, or rather stealing the hours of the nights, which,
   now that winter is approaching, begin to lengthen somewhat, I am
   endeavouring by the light of the lamp to dictate these comments,
   whatever they maybe worth, and am trying to mitigate with exposition
   the weariness of a mind which is a stranger to rest. I am not boasting,
   as some perhaps suspect, of the welcome given to the brethren, but I am
   simply confessing the causes of the delay. Who could boast when the
   flight of the people of the West, and the holy places, crowded as they
   are with penniless fugitives, naked and wounded, plainly reveal the
   ravages of the Barbarians? We cannot see what has occurred, without
   tears and moans. Who would have believed that mighty Rome, with its
   careless security of wealth, would be reduced to such extremities as to
   need shelter, food, and clothing? And yet, some are so hard-hearted and
   cruel that, instead of showing compassion, they break up the rags and
   bundles of the captives, and expect to find gold about those who are
   nothing than prisoners. In addition to this hindrance to my dictating,
   my eyes are growing dim with age and to some extent I share the
   suffering of the saintly Isaac: I am quite unable to go through the
   Hebrew books with such light as I have at night, for even in the full
   light of day they are hidden from my eyes owing to the smallness of the
   letters. In fact, it is only the voice of the brethren which enables me
   to master the commentaries of Greek writers.

   The Prefaces to Books viii. to xiv. contain nothing of special
   interest.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5434] Under whose care Eustochium had been trained.

   [5435] By the Goths under Alaric. The city was taken in a.d. 410.

   [5436] Ps. xxxix. 3, 4.

   [5437] Ecclus. xxii. 6.

   [5438] Rufinus who died a.d. 410, in Sicily, on his way to the Holy
   Land from Aquileia and Rome, whence he had been driven by the troubles
   in Italy.

   [5439] The giants who bore those names. See Hor. III. od. 4.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Daniel.

   The Commentary on Daniel was dedicated to Pammachius and Marcella in
   the year 407. It is in a single book, and is aimed at the criticisms of
   Porphyry, who, like most modern critics, took the predictions in the
   Book of Daniel as relating to the time of Antiochus Epiphanes and the
   Maccabees, and written near that date. The Preface is very similar to
   that prefixed to the Vulgate translation of Daniel.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Prefaces to the Commentaries on the Minor Prophets.

   For the order and date of writing of these Commentaries see the Preface
   to Amos, Book iii., and the note there.

   Hosea.

   This Commentary was dedicated to Pammachius, a.d. 406 (sixth consulate
   of Arcadius--Preface to Amos, Book iii. The Preface to Book i. is
   chiefly taken up with a discussion on Hosea's "wife of whoredoms." He
   takes the story as allegorical; it cannot be literal, for "God commands
   nothing but what is honourable, nor does he, by bidding men do
   disgraceful things, make that conduct honourable which is disgraceful."
   Jerome then describes, as in former Prefaces, the chief Greek
   commentators, of whom Apollinaris and Origen had written very shortly
   on Hosea, Pierius at great length, but to little purpose; and says that
   he had himself obtained from Didymus of Alexandria that he should
   complete the Commentary of Origen. He had himself often judged
   independently, though with little knowledge of Hebrew, but he had been
   in earnest, while most scholars were "more concerned for their bellies
   than their hearts, and thought themselves learned if in the doctors'
   waiting rooms they could disparage other men's works."

   In the Preface to Book ii. Jerome complains of his detractors, and
   appeals from the present favour of high-placed men to the posthumous
   authority of sound ability.

   In Book iii. he claims Pammachius as his defender, though he fears the
   judgment of his great learning.

   Joel.

   This Commentary also is addressed to Pammachius, a.d. 406. It is in one
   book. It gives the order of the Twelve Prophets adopted by the LXX. and
   the Hebrew respectively, the Hebrew order being that now in use. It
   also gives the etymological meaning of their names.

   Amos.

   In three books, addressed also to Pammachius, a.d. 406 (Preface to
   Amos, Book iii.). The Preface to Book i. merely gives a description of
   Tekoa, Amos' birthplace. That to Book ii. speaks of old age, with its
   advantages for self-control and its trials in various infirmities, such
   as phlegm, dim eyesight, loosened teeth, colic, and gout. That to Book
   iii. contains the passage several times referred to for the order of
   these Commentaries, which is as follows:

   We have not discussed them in regular sequence from the first to the
   ninth, as they are read, but as we have been able, and in accordance
   with requests made to us. Nahum, Micah, Zephaniah, Haggai, [5440] I
   first addressed to Paula and Eustochium, her daughter, who are never
   weary; I next dedicated two books on Habakkuk to Chromatius, bishop of
   Aquileia; I then proceeded to explain, at your command, Pammachius, and
   after a long interval of silence, Obadiah and Jonah. [5441] In the
   [5442] present year, which bears in the calendar the name of the sixth
   consulate of Arcadius Augustus and Anitius Probus, I interpreted
   Malachi for Exsuperius, bishop of Toulouse, and Minervius and
   Alexander, monks of that city. Unable to refuse your request I
   immediately went back to the beginning of the volume, and expounded
   Hosea, Joel, and Amos. A severe sickness followed, and I showed my
   rashness in resuming the dictation of this work too hastily; and,
   whereas others hesitate to write and frequently correct their work, I
   entrusted mine to the fortune which attends those who employ a
   secretary, and hazarded my reputation for ability and orthodoxy; for,
   as I have often testified, I cannot endure the toil of writing with my
   own hand; and, in expounding the Holy Scriptures, what we want is not a
   polished style and oratorical flourishes, but learning and simple
   truth.

   Obadiah.

   Addressed to Pammachius a.d. 403. The Preface records how in early
   youth (some thirty years before), he had attempted an allegorical
   commentary of Obadiah, of which he was now ashamed, though it has
   lately been praised by a youth of similar years.

   Jonah.

   This was addressed to Chromatius, [5443] but belongs to the year 395.
   It is said in the Preface to be three years after the commentary on
   Micah, Nahum, etc. The Preface merely touches on the various places of
   Scripture in which Jonah is named.

   Micah.

   Addressed to Paula and Eustochium. a.d. 392. It is in two books. In the
   Preface to Book ii., Jerome vindicates himself against the charge of
   making mere compilations from Origen. He confesses, however, his great
   admiration for him. "What they consider a reproach," he says, "I regard
   as the highest praise, since I desire to imitate him who, I doubt not,
   is acceptable to all wise men, and to you."

   Nahum.

   Also to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 392. The Preface contains little of
   importance. Jerome mentions that the village of Elkosh, Nahum's
   birthplace, was pointed out to him by a guide in Galilee.

   Habakkuk.

   Addressed to Chromatius, a.d. 392. The commentary is in two books. The
   Preface to Book i. is long, but merely describes the contents of the
   book. That to Book ii. mentions among his adversaries, "The Serpent,
   and Sardanapalus, whose character is worse than his name"--expressions
   which have been referred to Rufinus; but the enmity between Jerome and
   Rufinus had not broken out in 392.

   Zephaniah.

   Addressed to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 392. In the Preface Jerome
   defends himself for writing for women, bringing many examples from
   Scripture and from classical writers to show the capacity of women.

   Haggai.

   Also to Paula and Eustochium, a.d. 392. The preface merely describes
   the occasion of the book, but says that Haggai's prophecy was
   contemporary with the reign of Tarquinius Superbus (b.c. 535-510).

   Zechariah.

   Addressed to Exsuperius, bishop of Toulouse, a.d. 406, in three books,
   and sent, "in the closing days of autumn, by the monk, Sisinnius, who
   had been sent with presents for the poor saints at Jerusalem, and was
   hastening to Egypt on a similar errand." The Prefaces to the three
   books mention these facts, but have nothing in them of note which has
   not been said before.

   Malachi.

   Addressed, a.d. 406, to Minervius and Alexander, presbyters of the
   diocese of Toulouse. The Jews, the Preface says, believe Malachi to be
   a name for Ezra. Origen and his followers believe that (according to
   his name) he was an angel. But we reject this view altogether, lest we
   be compelled to accept the doctrine of the fall of souls from heaven.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [5440] These four and Habakkuk are mentioned in the De Vir. Ill. (a.d.
   492), and were written about that date, Jonah three years after, but
   Obadiah probably not till 403. The rest are fixed to the Sixth
   Consulate of Arcadius, 406.

   [5441] But see Preface to Jonah, which is addressed to Chromatius.

   [5442] The year a.d. 406.

   [5443] Chromatius is named in this Preface distinctly. But see Preface
   to Amos, Book iii., which says that the Commentaries to Obadiah and
   Jonah were written at the request of Pammachius.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1   [2]1:1   [3]1:2   [4]1:2   [5]1:7   [6]1:10   [7]1:26
   [8]1:26   [9]1:27   [10]1:28   [11]1:28   [12]1:28   [13]1:28
   [14]1:28   [15]1:28   [16]1:28   [17]1:28   [18]1:28   [19]1:28
   [20]1:28   [21]1:31   [22]2   [23]2   [24]2:7   [25]2:8   [26]2:10
   [27]2:10   [28]2:10-11   [29]2:11   [30]2:11   [31]2:13   [32]2:16
   [33]2:17   [34]2:21-22   [35]2:21-22   [36]2:23   [37]2:24   [38]2:24
   [39]3   [40]3   [41]3:1   [42]3:1-6   [43]3:7   [44]3:14   [45]3:14
   [46]3:14   [47]3:16   [48]3:16   [49]3:16   [50]3:18   [51]3:18
   [52]3:18-19   [53]3:19   [54]3:19   [55]3:20   [56]3:21   [57]3:21
   [58]3:23   [59]3:24   [60]3:24   [61]3:24   [62]3:25   [63]4:5
   [64]4:7   [65]4:7   [66]4:15   [67]4:17   [68]4:19   [69]4:25
   [70]4:26   [71]5   [72]5:3   [73]5:27   [74]6:3   [75]6:3   [76]6:3
   [77]6:4   [78]6:5   [79]7   [80]7:2   [81]7:2   [82]7:2   [83]7:11
   [84]7:13   [85]7:23   [86]8   [87]8:8   [88]8:11   [89]8:20
   [90]8:21   [91]8:21   [92]8:21   [93]9:1   [94]9:1   [95]9:3
   [96]9:3   [97]9:4-6   [98]9:7   [99]9:7   [100]9:20-21   [101]9:20-21
   [102]10   [103]10:11   [104]11   [105]11:2   [106]11:4   [107]11:9
   [108]11:10-26   [109]11:31   [110]12:1   [111]12:1   [112]12:1
   [113]12:1   [114]12:1   [115]12:1-4   [116]12:4   [117]13:5-11
   [118]13:8   [119]13:10   [120]13:11   [121]14:2   [122]14:13-16
   [123]14:14   [124]14:18   [125]15:16   [126]15:16   [127]16:12
   [128]17:1   [129]17:1-2   [130]17:17   [131]18:1   [132]18:1
   [133]18:1-8   [134]18:11   [135]18:12   [136]18:23   [137]18:23-33
   [138]19:15-26   [139]19:17   [140]19:18-21   [141]19:26
   [142]19:30-38   [143]19:30-38   [144]19:30-38   [145]20   [146]20:11
   [147]21:3   [148]21:6   [149]21:12   [150]21:31   [151]22   [152]22
   [153]22:1   [154]23   [155]23:19   [156]24   [157]24:15-16
   [158]24:42   [159]25:1   [160]25:22   [161]25:22-23   [162]25:23
   [163]25:34   [164]26   [165]26:8   [166]26:12   [167]26:15
   [168]26:18   [169]27   [170]27   [171]27:36   [172]27:41-46
   [173]28:1-5   [174]28:11-13   [175]28:12   [176]28:12   [177]28:12
   [178]28:12-13   [179]28:12-13   [180]28:20   [181]28:20-21
   [182]29:10-11   [183]29:11   [184]29:15   [185]29:17-18   [186]29:20
   [187]30:1   [188]30:1-2   [189]30:2   [190]30:14-16   [191]30:33
   [192]31:36-37   [193]31:40   [194]31:41   [195]31:46-49   [196]32:2
   [197]32:5   [198]32:7   [199]32:10   [200]32:10   [201]32:14
   [202]32:24-25   [203]32:25   [204]32:28   [205]32:30   [206]32:30
   [207]32:31   [208]32:31   [209]33   [210]33:18-20   [211]34   [212]34
   [213]34:30   [214]35:4   [215]35:16   [216]35:16   [217]35:18-19
   [218]35:20   [219]35:21   [220]37:23   [221]37:23   [222]37:25
   [223]37:28   [224]37:35   [225]37:35   [226]37:36   [227]38
   [228]38:9   [229]38:12-18   [230]38:26   [231]38:26   [232]38:27-30
   [233]38:28-29   [234]39:12   [235]39:12   [236]39:12   [237]39:12
   [238]39:12-13   [239]39:23   [240]41:42-44   [241]41:45
   [242]41:50-52   [243]43:16   [244]46   [245]46:3-4   [246]46:26
   [247]46:26   [248]48:10   [249]49:10   [250]49:10   [251]49:11
   [252]49:17   [253]49:27   [254]49:27   [255]49:27   [256]49:31

   Exodus

   [257]1:1   [258]2:16-17   [259]3:3   [260]3:3   [261]3:5   [262]3:5
   [263]3:5   [264]3:14   [265]3:14   [266]3:14   [267]4:6   [268]4:20
   [269]4:24-26   [270]5:2   [271]7:13   [272]7:16   [273]11   [274]12
   [275]12:8   [276]12:8   [277]12:11   [278]12:11   [279]12:21-23
   [280]12:22   [281]12:23   [282]12:29   [283]12:29   [284]12:29-30
   [285]12:38   [286]12:46   [287]13:2   [288]13:2   [289]13:18
   [290]13:18   [291]14:19   [292]15:1   [293]15:20-21   [294]15:21
   [295]15:23   [296]15:23-25   [297]15:23-27   [298]15:27   [299]16:3
   [300]17:4   [301]17:8   [302]17:8-14   [303]17:11   [304]18:3
   [305]19:15   [306]20:5   [307]20:5   [308]20:12   [309]20:12
   [310]21:2   [311]21:10   [312]21:12-13   [313]22:28   [314]23:20
   [315]23:26   [316]25:11   [317]25:22   [318]27:20   [319]28
   [320]31:2-3   [321]32:4   [322]32:6   [323]32:10   [324]32:30
   [325]32:30-35   [326]32:31-32   [327]32:32   [328]33:3   [329]33:20
   [330]33:21-23   [331]34:29   [332]34:33   [333]34:35   [334]37
   [335]38:8

   Leviticus

   [336]2:11   [337]2:11   [338]2:13   [339]4:2   [340]4:27   [341]5:3
   [342]9:1   [343]9:7   [344]10:6   [345]10:9   [346]10:9   [347]10:9
   [348]10:12   [349]12:2-3   [350]12:6   [351]12:7   [352]14:1
   [353]14:6   [354]15:31   [355]16:2   [356]16:2   [357]16:5
   [358]16:6   [359]16:29   [360]18:9   [361]19:2   [362]19:15
   [363]21:3   [364]21:7   [365]21:10-12   [366]21:12   [367]21:13
   [368]21:13-14   [369]21:14   [370]21:17   [371]21:17-23
   [372]22:12-13   [373]22:13   [374]22:14   [375]23:27   [376]23:29
   [377]23:40-42   [378]25:8   [379]25:13

   Numbers

   [380]3:39   [381]4:3   [382]4:3   [383]4:23   [384]4:30   [385]4:35
   [386]4:39   [387]5:11   [388]5:17   [389]6:1   [390]7:5   [391]7:24
   [392]7:28-29   [393]11:4   [394]11:4-6   [395]11:16   [396]11:16
   [397]11:20   [398]11:20   [399]11:31   [400]11:31-4   [401]11:34
   [402]12:1   [403]12:3   [404]12:14   [405]13:23-24   [406]14:7
   [407]14:18   [408]16:26   [409]16:46-48   [410]18:15   [411]18:16
   [412]18:20   [413]18:20-24   [414]18:24   [415]19:1-10   [416]20:10
   [417]20:12   [418]20:13   [419]20:17   [420]20:17   [421]20:29
   [422]20:29   [423]21:9   [424]23:21   [425]23:21   [426]24:15-19
   [427]25:6-8   [428]25:7-8   [429]28:15   [430]28:22   [431]29:5
   [432]33   [433]33:47-48   [434]34:15   [435]35:6   [436]35:13
   [437]35:30

   Deuteronomy

   [438]5:14-15   [439]5:31   [440]7:13   [441]8:3   [442]8:12-14
   [443]8:15   [444]8:15   [445]9:6   [446]11:10   [447]11:11
   [448]11:14   [449]13:3   [450]13:5   [451]13:6-9   [452]15:12
   [453]15:21   [454]16:5   [455]17:5   [456]17:6   [457]17:9-11
   [458]17:12   [459]17:15   [460]18:2   [461]18:9-12   [462]18:13
   [463]18:13   [464]20:6-7   [465]20:7   [466]21:10-13   [467]21:11-12
   [468]21:17   [469]22:1   [470]22:4   [471]22:8   [472]22:10
   [473]22:23-24   [474]22:23-27   [475]22:24-25   [476]23:2   [477]23:3
   [478]24:1-4   [479]27:9   [480]27:9   [481]29:23   [482]32:7
   [483]32:15   [484]33:9   [485]34:5-6   [486]34:6   [487]34:6
   [488]34:6-8   [489]34:8   [490]34:8

   Joshua

   [491]2:18   [492]3   [493]3:17   [494]4:3   [495]4:20   [496]5:2
   [497]5:3   [498]5:9   [499]5:15   [500]5:15   [501]6:20   [502]7
   [503]7:12   [504]7:24-26   [505]8   [506]9   [507]9:27   [508]10:1
   [509]10:3   [510]10:12-14   [511]10:13   [512]10:16   [513]10:26
   [514]11:10   [515]11:19-20   [516]14:3   [517]14:15   [518]15:13-15
   [519]15:14   [520]19:50   [521]22:27   [522]24:28   [523]24:29
   [524]24:30   [525]24:30   [526]24:30   [527]24:33

   Judges

   [528]1:13-15   [529]2:9   [530]5:21   [531]6:2   [532]6:36-40
   [533]6:37   [534]11:1   [535]11:30-31   [536]11:34-40   [537]15:17-19
   [538]17:5   [539]19   [540]20   [541]20:47   [542]21:19-23

   Ruth

   [543]1   [544]1:14   [545]1:16

   1 Samuel

   [546]1:3   [547]1:15   [548]1:17   [549]1:27-28   [550]2
   [551]2:12-17   [552]2:12-17   [553]2:18   [554]2:18   [555]2:21
   [556]2:22   [557]2:22   [558]2:22   [559]2:22   [560]2:24   [561]2:25
   [562]2:27-36   [563]2:30   [564]4   [565]4   [566]4:18   [567]4:19-22
   [568]7:7   [569]8:1-4   [570]8:3   [571]9   [572]9:9   [573]12:3
   [574]12:3-5   [575]14:24   [576]14:24   [577]14:27   [578]15:11
   [579]15:11   [580]15:17   [581]15:35   [582]16:6   [583]16:7
   [584]16:7   [585]16:7   [586]16:7   [587]16:11-13   [588]17:49
   [589]17:50-51   [590]18:6-7   [591]21:1   [592]21:4   [593]21:4-5
   [594]21:10   [595]22:16-18   [596]22:17-19   [597]25:38   [598]28:13
   [599]30:1

   2 Samuel

   [600]4:11   [601]5:7   [602]5:9   [603]6:6-7   [604]6:6-7
   [605]6:7-8   [606]8:13-14   [607]11   [608]11:4   [609]12:13
   [610]12:13   [611]12:16   [612]13   [613]13:14   [614]16:10
   [615]17:1-4   [616]17:14   [617]18:33   [618]21:1   [619]24
   [620]24:10

   1 Kings

   [621]1:1-4   [622]1:4   [623]1:38   [624]2:10   [625]3:3
   [626]3:16-28   [627]4:33   [628]7:14   [629]8:9   [630]8:46
   [631]8:46   [632]11:1-4   [633]11:3   [634]11:14   [635]12:10
   [636]13:24   [637]14:5   [638]14:8   [639]15:11   [640]16:34
   [641]17   [642]17:4   [643]17:6   [644]17:8-16   [645]17:9-16
   [646]18:3-4   [647]18:4   [648]18:21   [649]18:40   [650]19:4
   [651]19:4-6   [652]19:8-11   [653]19:11-13   [654]19:21   [655]21:10
   [656]21:13   [657]21:19   [658]21:19   [659]21:21   [660]21:23
   [661]21:25   [662]21:27   [663]21:27-29   [664]21:27-29
   [665]21:28-29   [666]21:29   [667]22:19

   2 Kings

   [668]1:8   [669]2:11   [670]2:11   [671]2:11   [672]2:11   [673]2:13
   [674]2:13   [675]2:13   [676]2:19-22   [677]4:27   [678]4:38-39
   [679]4:38-41   [680]6:1-2   [681]6:1-2   [682]6:5-6   [683]6:16
   [684]6:17   [685]6:18-23   [686]10:15-16   [687]13:21   [688]18
   [689]18:3-4   [690]18:7   [691]18:14   [692]19:28   [693]19:35
   [694]20   [695]20:1   [696]20:5   [697]20:12-13   [698]20:13
   [699]20:17   [700]20:18   [701]22:14   [702]23:29   [703]23:29
   [704]23:29

   1 Chronicles

   [705]2:32   [706]2:55   [707]6:34-38   [708]11:5-6   [709]15:21
   [710]21:15   [711]21:18   [712]22:8   [713]23:14   [714]28:3

   2 Chronicles

   [715]3:1   [716]6:36   [717]8:5   [718]15:2   [719]17:3   [720]19:2
   [721]20:5-25   [722]20:26   [723]22:9   [724]32:26   [725]32:30
   [726]33:12-13   [727]33:12-13   [728]34:2   [729]34:22-23
   [730]35:20   [731]35:20-24   [732]35:22

   Nehemiah

   [733]4:16

   Esther

   [734]2:1-4   [735]6:1   [736]7:10   [737]9:20-32   [738]14:11
   [739]14:16

   Job

   [740]1:1   [741]1:16   [742]1:20-21   [743]1:21   [744]1:21
   [745]1:21   [746]1:21   [747]1:21   [748]2:3   [749]2:3   [750]2:4-5
   [751]2:4-5   [752]2:4-5   [753]2:6   [754]3:3   [755]3:3
   [756]4:17-21   [757]4:18   [758]4:18   [759]5:17   [760]7:1
   [761]7:1   [762]7:1   [763]7:20-21   [764]9:9   [765]9:15-16
   [766]9:20   [767]9:20   [768]9:29-31   [769]9:30   [770]9:30
   [771]9:31   [772]10:15   [773]14:4   [774]14:4-5   [775]14:4-5
   [776]14:4-5   [777]14:5   [778]16:21   [779]18:14-15   [780]19:23
   [781]19:25-27   [782]25:5   [783]25:5   [784]25:5-6   [785]25:5-6
   [786]31:35   [787]38:3   [788]38:32   [789]40:4   [790]40:8
   [791]40:16   [792]40:16   [793]40:16   [794]40:16   [795]40:21
   [796]41:13   [797]41:27   [798]41:34   [799]42:6   [800]42:6

   Psalms

   [801]1   [802]1:2   [803]1:2   [804]1:2   [805]1:2   [806]1:2
   [807]1:2   [808]1:2   [809]1:5   [810]2:4   [811]2:8   [812]2:9
   [813]4:4   [814]4:4   [815]4:4   [816]4:6   [817]5:8   [818]5:12
   [819]6   [820]6:5   [821]6:5   [822]6:5   [823]6:6   [824]6:6
   [825]6:6   [826]7:9   [827]8:3   [828]8:5   [829]9:6   [830]10
   [831]10:8-9   [832]11:2   [833]12   [834]12:1   [835]12:1   [836]12:7
   [837]14:1   [838]14:1   [839]14:3   [840]14:4   [841]15:2-3
   [842]16:4   [843]16:5   [844]16:5   [845]16:5-6   [846]16:7
   [847]16:9   [848]17:4   [849]18:15   [850]18:37   [851]18:45
   [852]19:4   [853]19:6   [854]19:9   [855]19:12-13   [856]19:12-13
   [857]19:12-14   [858]19:13   [859]19:13   [860]20:7   [861]21:1
   [862]22:1   [863]22:2   [864]22:22   [865]22:29-30   [866]23:5
   [867]24:1   [868]24:1   [869]24:1   [870]25:7   [871]25:15
   [872]26:1-2   [873]26:2   [874]26:8   [875]26:8   [876]27:4
   [877]27:13   [878]27:13   [879]29:3   [880]29:10   [881]30:5
   [882]30:6-7   [883]30:7   [884]30:9   [885]30:11   [886]32:1
   [887]32:1-2   [888]32:4   [889]32:4   [890]32:5   [891]32:5
   [892]32:5-6   [893]32:9   [894]32:9   [895]32:10   [896]33:6
   [897]33:15   [898]34:2   [899]34:8   [900]34:8   [901]34:8
   [902]34:14   [903]35:13   [904]35:13   [905]36:6   [906]36:6
   [907]36:7   [908]36:27   [909]37:5-6   [910]37:25   [911]37:28
   [912]37:39   [913]37:39   [914]38:2   [915]38:5   [916]38:5
   [917]38:7   [918]38:7   [919]38:8   [920]38:13   [921]38:13-14
   [922]38:14   [923]39:1-2   [924]39:1-2   [925]39:2   [926]39:3-4
   [927]39:4   [928]39:5   [929]39:6   [930]39:6   [931]39:12
   [932]39:12   [933]40:2   [934]40:2   [935]41   [936]41:3   [937]41:7
   [938]41:9   [939]42:1-2   [940]42:1-3   [941]42:3   [942]42:6
   [943]42:11   [944]42:11   [945]44:8   [946]44:17-18   [947]44:21
   [948]44:21   [949]44:22   [950]44:22   [951]44:23   [952]44:23
   [953]45   [954]45   [955]45:1   [956]45:1   [957]45:3   [958]45:9
   [959]45:9   [960]45:10   [961]45:10   [962]45:10   [963]45:10-11
   [964]45:10-11   [965]45:13   [966]45:13   [967]45:13   [968]45:13
   [969]45:13   [970]45:14   [971]45:14   [972]45:16-17   [973]46:4
   [974]47:7   [975]48:2   [976]48:8   [977]48:8   [978]48:8   [979]49:7
   [980]50:16-17   [981]50:18   [982]50:20   [983]50:20   [984]50:20
   [985]50:20-21   [986]51:1   [987]51:1   [988]51:1   [989]51:2-4
   [990]51:4   [991]51:4   [992]51:4   [993]51:5   [994]51:5   [995]51:5
   [996]51:5   [997]51:7   [998]51:7   [999]51:12   [1000]51:12
   [1001]51:13   [1002]51:17   [1003]53:4   [1004]53:5   [1005]55:6
   [1006]55:6   [1007]55:6   [1008]55:6   [1009]55:6   [1010]55:7-8
   [1011]55:13   [1012]55:21   [1013]56:4   [1014]57:4   [1015]57:4
   [1016]57:6   [1017]57:7-8   [1018]58:3   [1019]58:4   [1020]62:1
   [1021]62:2   [1022]63:1   [1023]63:1-2   [1024]63:1-2   [1025]63:1-3
   [1026]63:8   [1027]63:8   [1028]68:13   [1029]68:14   [1030]68:27
   [1031]68:30   [1032]69:4   [1033]69:5   [1034]69:5   [1035]69:5
   [1036]69:10   [1037]69:11   [1038]69:12   [1039]71:7   [1040]72:1
   [1041]72:15   [1042]72:20   [1043]73   [1044]73   [1045]73:2
   [1046]73:2-3   [1047]73:3-9   [1048]73:11   [1049]73:11-12
   [1050]73:12   [1051]73:13   [1052]73:13   [1053]73:13-14
   [1054]73:15   [1055]73:15   [1056]73:15   [1057]73:16-17
   [1058]73:16-17   [1059]73:17   [1060]73:20   [1061]73:22-23
   [1062]73:22-23   [1063]73:25   [1064]73:26   [1065]73:26
   [1066]73:26   [1067]73:28   [1068]74:13-14   [1069]74:19   [1070]75:5
   [1071]76:1   [1072]76:1   [1073]76:2   [1074]76:2   [1075]76:2
   [1076]77:2   [1077]77:4   [1078]77:4   [1079]77:10   [1080]78:12
   [1081]78:25   [1082]78:57   [1083]79:1   [1084]79:1-3   [1085]79:11
   [1086]80:5   [1087]82:1   [1088]82:6-7   [1089]83:8   [1090]83:9-10
   [1091]84:1-2   [1092]84:6   [1093]84:6   [1094]84:7   [1095]84:10
   [1096]85:4   [1097]85:10   [1098]85:11   [1099]85:11-12
   [1100]87:1-2   [1101]87:1-2   [1102]87:5   [1103]88:21   [1104]89:2
   [1105]89:48   [1106]90:10   [1107]90:10   [1108]91:5-7   [1109]91:6
   [1110]91:10   [1111]92:14   [1112]92:15   [1113]94:20   [1114]95:4-5
   [1115]95:6   [1116]96:6   [1117]97:8   [1118]97:8   [1119]99:6
   [1120]101:6   [1121]101:8   [1122]102:5   [1123]102:7   [1124]102:9
   [1125]102:9   [1126]102:9   [1127]102:9   [1128]103:2-4   [1129]103:8
   [1130]103:10   [1131]104:4   [1132]104:18   [1133]104:18
   [1134]104:20-21   [1135]104:24   [1136]104:26   [1137]104:29
   [1138]104:35   [1139]105:37   [1140]106:32   [1141]109:24
   [1142]109:24   [1143]110:3   [1144]111:10   [1145]112:9
   [1146]113:7-8   [1147]115:4   [1148]116:7   [1149]116:7   [1150]116:7
   [1151]116:9   [1152]116:11   [1153]116:11   [1154]116:11
   [1155]116:12-13   [1156]116:14-15   [1157]116:15   [1158]116:15
   [1159]118:6   [1160]118:6   [1161]118:6   [1162]118:6   [1163]118:8-9
   [1164]118:25   [1165]119   [1166]119:1   [1167]119:1   [1168]119:11
   [1169]119:11   [1170]119:18   [1171]119:18   [1172]119:18
   [1173]119:18   [1174]119:20   [1175]119:54   [1176]119:62
   [1177]119:67   [1178]119:67   [1179]119:67   [1180]119:83
   [1181]119:103   [1182]119:104   [1183]119:105   [1184]119:105
   [1185]119:123   [1186]119:136   [1187]119:137   [1188]119:140
   [1189]119:176   [1190]120   [1191]120   [1192]120   [1193]120:3
   [1194]120:5   [1195]120:5   [1196]120:5-6   [1197]120:5-6
   [1198]121:1   [1199]121:4   [1200]121:4   [1201]121:6   [1202]123:2
   [1203]124:7   [1204]126:5   [1205]126:5   [1206]126:5-6   [1207]127
   [1208]127:1   [1209]127:1   [1210]127:2   [1211]127:3   [1212]127:4
   [1213]127:5   [1214]128:2   [1215]128:3   [1216]128:3   [1217]128:3
   [1218]128:6   [1219]131:1   [1220]131:2   [1221]132:1   [1222]132:1
   [1223]132:2-5   [1224]132:6   [1225]132:7   [1226]132:7
   [1227]132:11   [1228]132:14   [1229]132:17   [1230]133:1
   [1231]134:1   [1232]137:1   [1233]137:3   [1234]137:4   [1235]137:9
   [1236]137:9   [1237]139:6   [1238]139:11-12   [1239]139:12
   [1240]139:13   [1241]139:21   [1242]139:21-22   [1243]139:21-22
   [1244]140:6   [1245]141:3-4   [1246]141:4   [1247]141:4   [1248]141:4
   [1249]141:5   [1250]141:6   [1251]142:4   [1252]142:7   [1253]142:7
   [1254]142:7   [1255]143:2   [1256]143:2   [1257]143:2   [1258]143:2
   [1259]143:4   [1260]146:4   [1261]146:7   [1262]146:7-8   [1263]161:4

   Proverbs

   [1264]1:1-6   [1265]1:3   [1266]1:7   [1267]3:5-6   [1268]3:9
   [1269]3:21   [1270]4:5-9   [1271]4:23   [1272]4:23   [1273]4:23
   [1274]4:23   [1275]5:3   [1276]5:15   [1277]5:22   [1278]6:8
   [1279]6:20   [1280]6:26   [1281]6:27-28   [1282]6:27-28   [1283]7:2
   [1284]7:3   [1285]7:27   [1286]9:18   [1287]10:1   [1288]10:9
   [1289]10:9   [1290]10:19   [1291]13:4   [1292]13:4   [1293]13:8
   [1294]13:8   [1295]13:8   [1296]14:1   [1297]14:12   [1298]14:12
   [1299]14:12   [1300]14:28   [1301]14:29   [1302]15:1   [1303]16:3
   [1304]16:5   [1305]16:9   [1306]16:26   [1307]16:26   [1308]18:3
   [1309]18:12   [1310]18:17   [1311]18:17   [1312]19:21   [1313]19:25
   [1314]20:1   [1315]20:9   [1316]20:9   [1317]20:9   [1318]20:9
   [1319]20:9   [1320]20:17   [1321]20:24   [1322]21:9   [1323]21:19
   [1324]24:16   [1325]24:16   [1326]24:16   [1327]24:21-22
   [1328]24:21-22   [1329]25:23   [1330]25:24   [1331]27:15
   [1332]28:13   [1333]30:15-16   [1334]31:10-11

   Ecclesiastes

   [1335]1:2   [1336]1:9   [1337]1:9-10   [1338]1:13   [1339]1:18
   [1340]3:1-2   [1341]3:4   [1342]3:5   [1343]3:5   [1344]3:5
   [1345]3:7   [1346]3:10   [1347]3:16-22   [1348]4:9-12   [1349]4:12
   [1350]7:10   [1351]7:12   [1352]7:16   [1353]7:16   [1354]7:16
   [1355]7:16   [1356]7:16   [1357]7:20   [1358]7:21   [1359]7:24-25
   [1360]7:28-29   [1361]8:63   [1362]9:2   [1363]9:4   [1364]9:8
   [1365]9:8   [1366]9:8   [1367]9:8   [1368]9:8   [1369]9:8
   [1370]9:51   [1371]9:54   [1372]9:55   [1373]10:1   [1374]10:4
   [1375]10:4   [1376]10:4   [1377]10:11   [1378]11:2   [1379]11:19
   [1380]12:7   [1381]12:7   [1382]12:7   [1383]35

   Song of Solomon

   [1384]1:3-4   [1385]1:4   [1386]1:4   [1387]1:4   [1388]1:4
   [1389]1:4   [1390]1:5   [1391]1:7   [1392]1:7   [1393]1:7   [1394]1:7
   [1395]1:7   [1396]1:7   [1397]1:8   [1398]1:10-11   [1399]1:13
   [1400]2:1   [1401]2:1   [1402]2:1   [1403]2:1   [1404]2:3   [1405]2:4
   [1406]2:5   [1407]2:6   [1408]2:6   [1409]2:10-11   [1410]2:10-12
   [1411]2:10-12   [1412]2:12   [1413]2:13   [1414]2:13-14   [1415]2:15
   [1416]2:16   [1417]2:16   [1418]3:1   [1419]3:1   [1420]3:1
   [1421]3:1   [1422]3:2   [1423]3:2-3   [1424]3:4   [1425]3:4
   [1426]3:7-8   [1427]4:2   [1428]4:6   [1429]4:7   [1430]4:7
   [1431]4:8   [1432]4:9   [1433]4:9   [1434]4:9-10   [1435]4:12
   [1436]4:12   [1437]4:12   [1438]4:12-13   [1439]5:1   [1440]5:2
   [1441]5:2   [1442]5:2   [1443]5:2   [1444]5:2   [1445]5:2   [1446]5:2
   [1447]5:2   [1448]5:2-3   [1449]5:3   [1450]5:4   [1451]5:6
   [1452]5:6   [1453]5:7   [1454]5:7   [1455]5:8   [1456]5:10
   [1457]5:10   [1458]5:10   [1459]5:16   [1460]6:8   [1461]6:8-9
   [1462]6:9   [1463]6:9   [1464]6:10   [1465]7:1   [1466]8:5
   [1467]8:5   [1468]8:5   [1469]8:6   [1470]8:7   [1471]8:10

   Isaiah

   [1472]1:3   [1473]1:9   [1474]1:15   [1475]1:21   [1476]1:28
   [1477]3:12   [1478]3:12   [1479]3:12   [1480]3:16   [1481]4:3
   [1482]5:20   [1483]5:20   [1484]5:20   [1485]5:21   [1486]6
   [1487]6:2   [1488]6:2   [1489]6:2-3   [1490]6:5   [1491]6:5
   [1492]6:6   [1493]7:14   [1494]7:14   [1495]7:14   [1496]7:14
   [1497]7:14   [1498]7:14-15   [1499]7:20   [1500]8:1   [1501]8:1
   [1502]8:1   [1503]8:3   [1504]8:18   [1505]8:20   [1506]9:6
   [1507]11:1   [1508]11:1   [1509]11:1   [1510]11:1   [1511]11:3
   [1512]11:6-8   [1513]11:10   [1514]13:21-22   [1515]13:22
   [1516]14:12   [1517]14:12   [1518]14:12   [1519]14:12-13
   [1520]14:13   [1521]14:13-14   [1522]14:13-14   [1523]14:13-14
   [1524]14:14   [1525]14:14   [1526]15:1   [1527]15:5   [1528]16:1
   [1529]16:1   [1530]16:6   [1531]18:2   [1532]19:18   [1533]19:19
   [1534]19:21   [1535]20:2   [1536]21:9   [1537]22:12-13
   [1538]22:12-14   [1539]23:15-16   [1540]24:2   [1541]24:16
   [1542]24:21   [1543]26:12   [1544]26:18   [1545]26:20   [1546]26:20
   [1547]27:11   [1548]28:9-10   [1549]28:9-11   [1550]28:12
   [1551]28:15   [1552]28:16   [1553]28:24   [1554]29:1   [1555]29:11
   [1556]29:14   [1557]30:15   [1558]30:15   [1559]30:17   [1560]31:6
   [1561]31:9   [1562]31:9   [1563]32:6   [1564]32:6   [1565]32:9
   [1566]32:20   [1567]32:20   [1568]33:15   [1569]33:15   [1570]34:5
   [1571]34:5   [1572]34:5   [1573]34:14-16   [1574]34:15   [1575]37:22
   [1576]38   [1577]38:19   [1578]38:19   [1579]40:3   [1580]40:3
   [1581]40:5   [1582]40:6   [1583]40:12   [1584]40:12   [1585]40:15
   [1586]40:17   [1587]41:8   [1588]42:14   [1589]43:26   [1590]45:9
   [1591]45:21-22   [1592]46:4   [1593]46:8-9   [1594]47:1-2
   [1595]47:1-3   [1596]47:14   [1597]49   [1598]49:2   [1599]49:8
   [1600]50:6   [1601]50:6   [1602]51:7-8   [1603]53:6   [1604]53:8
   [1605]54:1   [1606]54:1   [1607]54:1   [1608]56:3   [1609]56:3
   [1610]58:3-4   [1611]58:5   [1612]58:5   [1613]60:1   [1614]60:6
   [1615]63:1   [1616]63:3   [1617]63:3   [1618]64:4   [1619]65:5
   [1620]65:5   [1621]65:13-14   [1622]65:17   [1623]66:1-2   [1624]66:2
   [1625]66:2   [1626]66:2   [1627]66:5   [1628]66:7-8   [1629]66:22
   [1630]66:24

   Jeremiah

   [1631]1   [1632]1   [1633]1:5   [1634]1:5   [1635]1:5   [1636]1:7
   [1637]1:10   [1638]1:11   [1639]1:13   [1640]1:18   [1641]1:20
   [1642]2   [1643]2:13   [1644]2:13   [1645]2:18   [1646]2:18
   [1647]2:21   [1648]2:22   [1649]2:22   [1650]2:25   [1651]2:27
   [1652]2:32   [1653]3:1   [1654]3:3   [1655]3:3   [1656]3:3
   [1657]3:3   [1658]3:6-7   [1659]3:10   [1660]3:20   [1661]3:22
   [1662]5:1-2   [1663]5:8   [1664]5:8   [1665]5:8   [1666]5:8
   [1667]6:14   [1668]6:16   [1669]7:4   [1670]7:4   [1671]7:16
   [1672]7:21-22   [1673]8:4   [1674]8:4   [1675]8:22   [1676]9:1
   [1677]9:1   [1678]9:21   [1679]9:21   [1680]9:21   [1681]9:24
   [1682]10:11   [1683]10:14   [1684]10:23   [1685]10:23   [1686]10:23
   [1687]10:23   [1688]11:14   [1689]12:1   [1690]12:13   [1691]12:13
   [1692]13:4-5   [1693]13:6-7   [1694]13:23   [1695]13:23   [1696]13:23
   [1697]13:23   [1698]13:23   [1699]13:26   [1700]14:11-12
   [1701]14:15   [1702]15:10   [1703]15:17   [1704]16:2   [1705]16:2
   [1706]17:9   [1707]17:11   [1708]17:13   [1709]17:14   [1710]17:16
   [1711]18:3-4   [1712]18:7-8   [1713]18:7-12   [1714]20:14
   [1715]20:14   [1716]20:17   [1717]20:18   [1718]22:10   [1719]23:23
   [1720]23:28   [1721]23:28   [1722]24:1-3   [1723]24:3   [1724]24:6-7
   [1725]26:21-24   [1726]27:6   [1727]28:13   [1728]29:14-20
   [1729]29:20-23   [1730]29:22   [1731]30:10-11   [1732]31:22
   [1733]31:31   [1734]31:33   [1735]31:33-34   [1736]31:34
   [1737]32:30   [1738]35   [1739]35:6-7   [1740]35:11   [1741]35:18
   [1742]35:19   [1743]36   [1744]36:23   [1745]37:18-19   [1746]38:7
   [1747]39:11   [1748]40   [1749]50:23   [1750]51:6   [1751]51:6
   [1752]51:6

   Lamentations

   [1753]1   [1754]2:18   [1755]2:18   [1756]3:24   [1757]3:26-42
   [1758]3:27-28   [1759]3:27-28   [1760]3:30   [1761]3:31   [1762]4:4
   [1763]4:6   [1764]4:20

   Ezekiel

   [1765]1:4   [1766]1:7   [1767]1:7   [1768]1:11   [1769]1:14
   [1770]1:15-20   [1771]1:16   [1772]1:18   [1773]1:20   [1774]1:22
   [1775]2:1   [1776]2:6   [1777]2:9-10   [1778]2:10   [1779]3:1
   [1780]3:8-9   [1781]4:9-16   [1782]5:1-5   [1783]8:1   [1784]8:3
   [1785]8:14   [1786]10:8-22   [1787]10:18-19   [1788]12:27-28
   [1789]13:10-16   [1790]14:14   [1791]14:14   [1792]14:20
   [1793]16:1-10   [1794]16:4-6   [1795]16:6   [1796]16:11   [1797]16:12
   [1798]16:14   [1799]16:25   [1800]16:25   [1801]16:25   [1802]16:42
   [1803]16:55   [1804]16:55   [1805]16:60-61   [1806]16:62-63
   [1807]18:4   [1808]18:4   [1809]18:4   [1810]18:4   [1811]18:4
   [1812]18:20   [1813]18:20   [1814]18:20   [1815]18:23   [1816]18:23
   [1817]18:23   [1818]18:30-32   [1819]20:25   [1820]20:43-44
   [1821]23:3   [1822]24:15-18   [1823]24:16-18   [1824]24:18
   [1825]24:27   [1826]25:13   [1827]28:3   [1828]28:13   [1829]32:17
   [1830]33:10-11   [1831]33:11   [1832]33:11   [1833]33:11
   [1834]33:12   [1835]33:12   [1836]33:12   [1837]34:17   [1838]34:18
   [1839]34:20   [1840]34:21   [1841]34:31   [1842]36:24-26
   [1843]36:31-32   [1844]37:1   [1845]44:2   [1846]44:2-3   [1847]44:10
   [1848]44:15-16   [1849]44:22   [1850]46:20   [1851]47:1   [1852]47:8

   Daniel

   [1853]1   [1854]1:3-4   [1855]1:8   [1856]1:16   [1857]2   [1858]2:34
   [1859]2:45   [1860]2:45   [1861]2:45   [1862]3:25   [1863]3:25
   [1864]4:13   [1865]4:13   [1866]4:16   [1867]4:17   [1868]4:25
   [1869]4:27   [1870]4:27   [1871]4:32   [1872]4:33-37   [1873]5:1-3
   [1874]6   [1875]6:10   [1876]7:7-8   [1877]9:5   [1878]9:20
   [1879]9:23   [1880]9:23   [1881]9:23   [1882]9:24   [1883]12:2
   [1884]12:3

   Hosea

   [1885]1:2   [1886]1:2-3   [1887]1:2-4   [1888]2   [1889]2:6
   [1890]2:7   [1891]2:7-9   [1892]2:19   [1893]3:1   [1894]3:3
   [1895]3:3   [1896]3:4   [1897]6:5   [1898]7:4   [1899]7:4   [1900]7:6
   [1901]7:11   [1902]9:4   [1903]9:11   [1904]9:14   [1905]11:1
   [1906]11:1   [1907]11:8-9   [1908]11:9   [1909]13:14   [1910]13:14-15
   [1911]13:15   [1912]13:15

   Joel

   [1913]1:4   [1914]1:14   [1915]2:12-13   [1916]2:15   [1917]2:15
   [1918]2:29   [1919]3:13   [1920]3:18

   Amos

   [1921]1:1   [1922]1:1   [1923]1:3   [1924]1:3   [1925]2:12
   [1926]3:2   [1927]3:83   [1928]4:1   [1929]5:2   [1930]5:19
   [1931]6:4-6   [1932]6:11   [1933]6:13   [1934]6:14   [1935]7:1
   [1936]7:7   [1937]7:12-13   [1938]7:14   [1939]7:14   [1940]8:1
   [1941]8:11   [1942]8:13

   Obadiah

   [1943]1:4

   Jonah

   [1944]1:3   [1945]1:12   [1946]1:14   [1947]2:1-2   [1948]2:2-7
   [1949]3:4   [1950]3:5   [1951]3:5-10   [1952]3:10   [1953]4:10-11
   [1954]4:11

   Micah

   [1955]1:1   [1956]1:14   [1957]4:8   [1958]5:1   [1959]5:2
   [1960]5:2-3   [1961]6:8   [1962]7:2   [1963]7:19

   Nahum

   [1964]1:3   [1965]1:9   [1966]1:15   [1967]3:1

   Habakkuk

   [1968]1:2-4   [1969]1:8   [1970]1:9   [1971]1:10   [1972]1:16
   [1973]1:16   [1974]2:1   [1975]3:1   [1976]3:3   [1977]3:3-4
   [1978]3:4   [1979]3:8   [1980]3:14   [1981]3:16

   Zephaniah

   [1982]1:10   [1983]1:11

   Haggai

   [1984]1:1   [1985]1:6   [1986]2:6-7   [1987]2:11

   Zechariah

   [1988]3:1   [1989]3:1   [1990]3:3   [1991]3:9   [1992]3:9
   [1993]4:2-3   [1994]6:1-3   [1995]8:5   [1996]9:9   [1997]9:9
   [1998]9:10   [1999]9:16   [2000]9:16   [2001]9:16   [2002]9:17
   [2003]11:12-13   [2004]11:12-13   [2005]11:15   [2006]12:1
   [2007]12:10   [2008]12:10   [2009]13:7

   Malachi

   [2010]1:2-3   [2011]1:2-3   [2012]1:6   [2013]1:10-11   [2014]2:11-12
   [2015]3:1   [2016]3:6   [2017]3:7   [2018]3:14-15   [2019]3:18
   [2020]4:2   [2021]4:2   [2022]4:2   [2023]4:2

   Matthew

   [2024]1:5   [2025]1:6   [2026]1:17   [2027]1:18-25   [2028]1:20
   [2029]1:20   [2030]1:20   [2031]1:22-23   [2032]1:24-25   [2033]2:5-6
   [2034]2:6   [2035]2:6   [2036]2:13-15   [2037]2:23   [2038]3:2
   [2039]3:2   [2040]3:2   [2041]3:3   [2042]3:4   [2043]3:4   [2044]3:4
   [2045]3:4   [2046]3:7   [2047]3:9   [2048]3:10   [2049]3:10
   [2050]3:10   [2051]3:11   [2052]3:12   [2053]3:13   [2054]3:13
   [2055]3:16   [2056]3:16   [2057]3:17   [2058]4:1   [2059]4:1
   [2060]4:1-4   [2061]4:2-3   [2062]4:3   [2063]4:4   [2064]4:17
   [2065]4:18-20   [2066]4:18-22   [2067]4:18-22   [2068]4:18-22
   [2069]4:19   [2070]4:19   [2071]4:23   [2072]5:6   [2073]5:7
   [2074]5:8   [2075]5:8   [2076]5:8   [2077]5:9   [2078]5:10
   [2079]5:13   [2080]5:13   [2081]5:13   [2082]5:13   [2083]5:14
   [2084]5:14   [2085]5:14   [2086]5:14   [2087]5:15   [2088]5:19
   [2089]5:19   [2090]5:21-22   [2091]5:22   [2092]5:22   [2093]5:22
   [2094]5:22   [2095]5:23-24   [2096]5:23-24   [2097]5:23-24
   [2098]5:25   [2099]5:25-26   [2100]5:26   [2101]5:27   [2102]5:28
   [2103]5:28   [2104]5:28   [2105]5:28   [2106]5:32   [2107]5:34
   [2108]5:35   [2109]5:37   [2110]5:38-39   [2111]5:39   [2112]5:39
   [2113]5:40   [2114]5:42   [2115]5:44   [2116]5:44   [2117]5:48
   [2118]6:2   [2119]6:2   [2120]6:3   [2121]6:5   [2122]6:6
   [2123]6:10   [2124]6:12   [2125]6:12   [2126]6:13   [2127]6:16
   [2128]6:16-18   [2129]6:17   [2130]6:19-20   [2131]6:20   [2132]6:20
   [2133]6:21   [2134]6:23   [2135]6:23-24   [2136]6:23-24   [2137]6:24
   [2138]6:24   [2139]6:24   [2140]6:24   [2141]6:25   [2142]6:25
   [2143]6:25-26   [2144]6:26   [2145]6:27   [2146]6:28   [2147]6:32
   [2148]6:33   [2149]6:33   [2150]6:33   [2151]6:34   [2152]6:34
   [2153]6:34   [2154]6:34   [2155]6:34   [2156]7:1   [2157]7:3
   [2158]7:3-5   [2159]7:3-5   [2160]7:5   [2161]7:6   [2162]7:6
   [2163]7:7   [2164]7:8   [2165]7:11   [2166]7:13   [2167]7:14
   [2168]7:14   [2169]7:15   [2170]7:15   [2171]7:22   [2172]7:24-27
   [2173]8   [2174]8:10   [2175]8:10   [2176]8:11   [2177]8:12
   [2178]8:20   [2179]8:20-22   [2180]8:21   [2181]8:22   [2182]8:22
   [2183]8:22   [2184]8:25   [2185]8:25   [2186]8:25   [2187]8:26
   [2188]9:1-7   [2189]9:9   [2190]9:9   [2191]9:9   [2192]9:12-13
   [2193]9:12-13   [2194]9:13   [2195]9:17   [2196]9:20   [2197]9:21
   [2198]9:22   [2199]9:24   [2200]9:27   [2201]9:29   [2202]10:7
   [2203]10:8   [2204]10:9   [2205]10:9   [2206]10:9-10   [2207]10:10
   [2208]10:10   [2209]10:10   [2210]10:14   [2211]10:16
   [2212]10:22-34   [2213]10:23   [2214]10:23   [2215]10:24-25
   [2216]10:25   [2217]10:34   [2218]10:37   [2219]10:37   [2220]10:37
   [2221]10:40   [2222]10:40   [2223]11:7-14   [2224]11:8   [2225]11:10
   [2226]11:11   [2227]11:11   [2228]11:12   [2229]11:12   [2230]11:12
   [2231]11:13   [2232]11:13   [2233]11:14   [2234]11:18   [2235]11:25
   [2236]11:29   [2237]11:29   [2238]11:29   [2239]11:30   [2240]12:1-9
   [2241]12:20   [2242]12:24   [2243]12:25-26   [2244]12:30
   [2245]12:30   [2246]12:32   [2247]12:32   [2248]12:35   [2249]12:36
   [2250]12:36   [2251]12:36   [2252]12:36   [2253]12:39-40
   [2254]12:41   [2255]12:46   [2256]12:49   [2257]12:50   [2258]12:50
   [2259]13:3   [2260]13:7   [2261]13:7   [2262]13:8   [2263]13:8
   [2264]13:8   [2265]13:8   [2266]13:8   [2267]13:10-17   [2268]13:11
   [2269]13:22   [2270]13:22-23   [2271]13:24   [2272]13:25
   [2273]13:31   [2274]13:31-32   [2275]13:33   [2276]13:44
   [2277]13:45   [2278]13:45-46   [2279]13:45-46   [2280]13:46
   [2281]13:46   [2282]13:46   [2283]13:54-55   [2284]13:55
   [2285]13:58   [2286]14:13-21   [2287]14:15   [2288]14:15-21
   [2289]14:25   [2290]14:25-33   [2291]14:28   [2292]14:28
   [2293]14:29   [2294]14:31   [2295]14:31   [2296]14:31   [2297]14:32
   [2298]15:19   [2299]15:19-20   [2300]15:22   [2301]15:24
   [2302]15:26   [2303]15:27   [2304]15:28   [2305]15:32   [2306]15:32
   [2307]15:32-38   [2308]16:17-18   [2309]16:18   [2310]16:18
   [2311]16:18   [2312]16:18   [2313]16:18   [2314]16:23   [2315]16:23
   [2316]16:24   [2317]16:25   [2318]16:26   [2319]17:1-9   [2320]17:2
   [2321]17:15   [2322]17:19   [2323]17:20   [2324]17:20   [2325]17:21
   [2326]18:3   [2327]18:6   [2328]18:7   [2329]18:8-9   [2330]18:8-9
   [2331]18:10   [2332]18:11   [2333]18:15-17   [2334]18:18
   [2335]18:21-22   [2336]19:4   [2337]19:5   [2338]19:5   [2339]19:6
   [2340]19:9   [2341]19:9   [2342]19:10   [2343]19:10-12
   [2344]19:11-12   [2345]19:12   [2346]19:12   [2347]19:12
   [2348]19:12   [2349]19:12   [2350]19:12   [2351]19:16   [2352]19:21
   [2353]19:21   [2354]19:21   [2355]19:21   [2356]19:21   [2357]19:21
   [2358]19:21   [2359]19:21   [2360]19:21   [2361]19:21   [2362]19:21
   [2363]19:21   [2364]19:21   [2365]19:23-24   [2366]19:24
   [2367]19:24   [2368]19:26   [2369]19:27   [2370]19:28   [2371]19:28
   [2372]19:29   [2373]19:29   [2374]19:29   [2375]19:30   [2376]20:15
   [2377]20:15   [2378]20:15   [2379]20:16   [2380]20:16   [2381]20:23
   [2382]20:26   [2383]20:27   [2384]20:28   [2385]20:30-34
   [2386]21:1-3   [2387]21:1-7   [2388]21:1-9   [2389]21:2-5
   [2390]21:9   [2391]21:12-13   [2392]21:12-13   [2393]21:33
   [2394]22:11-13   [2395]22:13   [2396]22:13   [2397]22:14
   [2398]22:14   [2399]22:29-30   [2400]22:30   [2401]22:30
   [2402]22:30   [2403]22:30   [2404]22:32   [2405]23:5   [2406]23:6-7
   [2407]23:10   [2408]23:23-24   [2409]23:26-28   [2410]23:27
   [2411]23:27   [2412]23:37   [2413]23:37   [2414]23:37-38
   [2415]23:38   [2416]23:38   [2417]24:12   [2418]24:12   [2419]24:13
   [2420]24:17-18   [2421]24:17-18   [2422]24:17-18   [2423]24:19
   [2424]24:19   [2425]24:19   [2426]24:19-20   [2427]24:24
   [2428]24:28   [2429]24:46   [2430]25:1   [2431]25:1   [2432]25:1-10
   [2433]25:1-12   [2434]25:3   [2435]25:4   [2436]25:4   [2437]25:10
   [2438]25:13   [2439]25:15   [2440]25:31   [2441]25:33   [2442]25:34
   [2443]25:34-40   [2444]25:35-36   [2445]25:40   [2446]25:41
   [2447]25:41   [2448]25:41   [2449]26   [2450]26:6   [2451]26:8
   [2452]26:15   [2453]26:15   [2454]26:26   [2455]26:29   [2456]26:29
   [2457]26:31   [2458]26:33-35   [2459]26:39   [2460]26:40
   [2461]26:40-41   [2462]26:41   [2463]26:41   [2464]26:48-49
   [2465]26:49   [2466]26:52   [2467]26:74   [2468]27:6   [2469]27:9-10
   [2470]27:28-29   [2471]27:29   [2472]27:46   [2473]27:50-51
   [2474]27:51   [2475]27:51   [2476]27:51   [2477]27:51   [2478]27:52
   [2479]27:52-53   [2480]27:53   [2481]27:55-56   [2482]27:64
   [2483]27:66   [2484]28:1   [2485]28:1   [2486]28:2   [2487]28:9
   [2488]28:9   [2489]28:9   [2490]28:9   [2491]28:19   [2492]28:19
   [2493]28:20

   Mark

   [2494]1:1-3   [2495]1:4   [2496]1:5   [2497]1:6   [2498]1:30-31
   [2499]2:25-26   [2500]3:17   [2501]3:21   [2502]3:27   [2503]4:34
   [2504]5   [2505]5   [2506]5:39   [2507]5:39   [2508]5:41   [2509]5:43
   [2510]5:43   [2511]6:1-3   [2512]6:3   [2513]6:5   [2514]6:8
   [2515]7:11   [2516]7:24   [2517]8:34   [2518]9:5   [2519]9:29
   [2520]9:44   [2521]10:21   [2522]10:27   [2523]10:28-30
   [2524]10:29-30   [2525]10:30   [2526]10:50   [2527]12:41-44
   [2528]12:43   [2529]12:43-44   [2530]13:17   [2531]13:32   [2532]14
   [2533]14:4   [2534]14:8   [2535]14:35   [2536]14:37   [2537]14:51-52
   [2538]15:40-41   [2539]15:47   [2540]16:1   [2541]16:1-2   [2542]16:14

   Luke

   [2543]1   [2544]1:5   [2545]1:15   [2546]1:17   [2547]1:18
   [2548]1:18   [2549]1:20   [2550]1:20   [2551]1:20-22   [2552]1:20-22
   [2553]1:26-31   [2554]1:28   [2555]1:29   [2556]1:34   [2557]1:35
   [2558]1:39   [2559]1:41   [2560]1:41   [2561]1:41   [2562]1:41
   [2563]1:43   [2564]1:48   [2565]1:79   [2566]2:4   [2567]2:7
   [2568]2:7   [2569]2:7   [2570]2:8   [2571]2:10   [2572]2:14
   [2573]2:14   [2574]2:14   [2575]2:15   [2576]2:22   [2577]2:27
   [2578]2:29   [2579]2:33   [2580]2:34   [2581]2:36   [2582]2:36
   [2583]2:36   [2584]2:36   [2585]2:36-37   [2586]2:36-37
   [2587]2:36-37   [2588]2:36-37   [2589]2:36-38   [2590]2:41
   [2591]2:43   [2592]2:43-46   [2593]2:46   [2594]2:48   [2595]2:51
   [2596]2:51   [2597]2:51   [2598]2:51-52   [2599]2:52   [2600]3:11
   [2601]4:24   [2602]5:8   [2603]5:31   [2604]5:31   [2605]6
   [2606]6:12   [2607]6:15   [2608]6:20   [2609]6:21   [2610]6:42
   [2611]6:44   [2612]7   [2613]7:11   [2614]7:11-15   [2615]7:11-15
   [2616]7:18-19   [2617]7:27   [2618]7:27   [2619]7:28   [2620]7:28
   [2621]7:37   [2622]7:38   [2623]7:40   [2624]7:47   [2625]7:47
   [2626]7:47   [2627]7:47   [2628]7:47   [2629]7:47   [2630]7:48
   [2631]8:8   [2632]8:10   [2633]8:21   [2634]8:21   [2635]8:24
   [2636]8:24   [2637]8:55   [2638]9:23   [2639]9:23   [2640]9:23
   [2641]9:24   [2642]9:26   [2643]9:31   [2644]9:48   [2645]9:53
   [2646]9:54   [2647]9:58   [2648]9:59-60   [2649]9:59-62
   [2650]9:61-62   [2651]9:62   [2652]9:62   [2653]9:62   [2654]9:62
   [2655]9:62   [2656]9:62   [2657]10   [2658]10:5   [2659]10:18
   [2660]10:18   [2661]10:18   [2662]10:19   [2663]10:30
   [2664]10:30-34   [2665]10:30-35   [2666]10:30-35   [2667]10:34
   [2668]10:41-42   [2669]11:5   [2670]11:5-8   [2671]11:5-8
   [2672]11:7-8   [2673]11:8   [2674]11:15   [2675]11:34   [2676]11:41
   [2677]12:3   [2678]12:7   [2679]12:15   [2680]12:20   [2681]12:20
   [2682]12:20   [2683]12:35   [2684]12:35   [2685]12:47-48
   [2686]12:48   [2687]12:49   [2688]13:4   [2689]13:11-13   [2690]13:29
   [2691]13:32   [2692]14:9   [2693]14:10   [2694]14:10   [2695]14:11
   [2696]14:26   [2697]14:26   [2698]14:26-27   [2699]14:26-27
   [2700]14:27   [2701]14:28   [2702]14:28   [2703]14:33   [2704]14:33
   [2705]14:35   [2706]15:3   [2707]15:3-5   [2708]15:4-5   [2709]15:4-5
   [2710]15:5   [2711]15:5   [2712]15:5   [2713]15:7   [2714]15:7
   [2715]15:8-10   [2716]15:10   [2717]15:10   [2718]15:10
   [2719]15:11-24   [2720]15:11-32   [2721]15:19-31   [2722]15:20
   [2723]15:20   [2724]15:20-23   [2725]16:8   [2726]16:9   [2727]16:9
   [2728]16:9   [2729]16:9   [2730]16:9   [2731]16:9   [2732]16:9
   [2733]16:9   [2734]16:9   [2735]16:9   [2736]16:12   [2737]16:12
   [2738]16:13   [2739]16:13   [2740]16:15   [2741]16:16   [2742]16:19
   [2743]16:19-24   [2744]16:19-24   [2745]16:19-25   [2746]16:22
   [2747]16:23   [2748]16:25   [2749]16:25   [2750]16:29   [2751]17:1
   [2752]17:5   [2753]17:6   [2754]17:10   [2755]17:10   [2756]17:21
   [2757]17:21   [2758]17:21   [2759]17:27-29   [2760]17:37   [2761]18:1
   [2762]18:1   [2763]18:1   [2764]18:1-5   [2765]18:2-5   [2766]18:5
   [2767]18:8   [2768]18:8   [2769]18:9   [2770]18:10-14   [2771]18:11
   [2772]18:13   [2773]18:13   [2774]18:14   [2775]18:22   [2776]18:27
   [2777]18:27   [2778]18:28   [2779]18:29-30   [2780]18:29-30
   [2781]18:30   [2782]18:35-38   [2783]19:2-9   [2784]19:4   [2785]19:5
   [2786]19:10   [2787]19:23   [2788]19:41   [2789]19:41   [2790]19:41
   [2791]20:35   [2792]20:35-36   [2793]20:38   [2794]21:1-4
   [2795]21:1-4   [2796]21:19   [2797]21:31   [2798]21:33   [2799]21:34
   [2800]22:24   [2801]22:26   [2802]22:31   [2803]22:31-32
   [2804]22:42   [2805]22:43   [2806]22:46   [2807]22:47
   [2808]22:54-62   [2809]22:62   [2810]23:28   [2811]23:31
   [2812]23:34   [2813]23:34   [2814]23:38   [2815]23:42-43
   [2816]23:43   [2817]23:43   [2818]23:43   [2819]23:46   [2820]24:5
   [2821]24:10   [2822]24:13   [2823]24:16   [2824]24:28-31
   [2825]24:32   [2826]24:32   [2827]24:32   [2828]24:39   [2829]24:39
   [2830]24:39-40   [2831]24:42   [2832]24:42-43   [2833]24:50-51

   John

   [2834]1:1   [2835]1:1   [2836]1:1   [2837]1:5   [2838]1:5
   [2839]1:7-8   [2840]1:12-13   [2841]1:14   [2842]1:18   [2843]1:29
   [2844]1:29   [2845]1:29   [2846]1:36   [2847]1:41   [2848]1:42
   [2849]1:45   [2850]1:45   [2851]1:47   [2852]2:1   [2853]2:1-2
   [2854]2:1-11   [2855]2:11   [2856]2:12   [2857]2:14-16   [2858]3:2
   [2859]3:3   [2860]3:5   [2861]3:8   [2862]3:23   [2863]3:30
   [2864]3:31   [2865]4   [2866]4:5   [2867]4:6   [2868]4:7
   [2869]4:13-14   [2870]4:14   [2871]4:14   [2872]4:16-18   [2873]4:18
   [2874]4:24   [2875]4:32   [2876]4:35   [2877]5:2   [2878]5:14
   [2879]5:17   [2880]5:17   [2881]5:17   [2882]5:19   [2883]5:25
   [2884]5:28-29   [2885]5:30   [2886]5:35   [2887]5:44   [2888]6:5-13
   [2889]6:15   [2890]6:38   [2891]6:39   [2892]6:44   [2893]6:51
   [2894]6:56   [2895]6:57   [2896]6:60   [2897]6:66   [2898]6:70
   [2899]7:3-4   [2900]7:5   [2901]7:10   [2902]7:19   [2903]7:24
   [2904]7:37   [2905]8:3   [2906]8:12   [2907]8:23   [2908]8:44
   [2909]8:44   [2910]8:48   [2911]8:48   [2912]8:48   [2913]8:49
   [2914]8:56   [2915]8:56   [2916]9:2   [2917]9:2-3   [2918]9:3
   [2919]9:21   [2920]10:8   [2921]10:11   [2922]10:18   [2923]11:11
   [2924]11:11   [2925]11:35   [2926]11:35-36   [2927]11:35-36
   [2928]11:38   [2929]11:38-44   [2930]11:39   [2931]11:39
   [2932]11:43   [2933]11:43   [2934]11:43   [2935]11:43-44
   [2936]11:44   [2937]11:44   [2938]12   [2939]12   [2940]12:2
   [2941]12:2   [2942]12:2   [2943]12:2   [2944]12:10   [2945]12:24
   [2946]12:32   [2947]12:41   [2948]13:5   [2949]13:10   [2950]13:10
   [2951]13:15   [2952]13:20   [2953]13:23   [2954]13:25   [2955]13:26
   [2956]13:38   [2957]14:2   [2958]14:2   [2959]14:2   [2960]14:2-3
   [2961]14:3   [2962]14:6   [2963]14:6   [2964]14:23   [2965]14:27
   [2966]14:27   [2967]14:27   [2968]14:28   [2969]14:28   [2970]14:30
   [2971]14:30   [2972]14:31   [2973]15:5   [2974]15:18   [2975]15:19
   [2976]15:19   [2977]15:19   [2978]15:26   [2979]16:12-13
   [2980]16:33   [2981]17:12   [2982]17:20-21   [2983]17:20-23
   [2984]17:21   [2985]17:23   [2986]18:15-16   [2987]18:15-27
   [2988]18:23   [2989]18:28   [2990]19:6   [2991]19:6   [2992]19:6
   [2993]19:15   [2994]19:23   [2995]19:23   [2996]19:23-24
   [2997]19:23-24   [2998]19:25   [2999]19:25   [3000]19:26-27
   [3001]19:26-27   [3002]19:26-27   [3003]19:34   [3004]19:34
   [3005]19:37   [3006]19:38   [3007]19:38   [3008]19:41   [3009]20
   [3010]20:1-8   [3011]20:1-18   [3012]20:4   [3013]20:6-7
   [3014]20:11   [3015]20:12   [3016]20:17   [3017]20:17   [3018]20:17
   [3019]20:17   [3020]20:19   [3021]20:19   [3022]20:19   [3023]20:19
   [3024]20:20   [3025]20:22   [3026]20:22-23   [3027]20:26-28
   [3028]20:27   [3029]20:27   [3030]20:27   [3031]21:4   [3032]21:7
   [3033]21:7   [3034]21:9   [3035]21:12   [3036]21:13   [3037]21:15-17
   [3038]21:15-17   [3039]21:15-17   [3040]21:16   [3041]21:18

   Acts

   [3042]1:1   [3043]1:1   [3044]1:3   [3045]1:7   [3046]1:9
   [3047]1:9-12   [3048]1:11   [3049]1:12   [3050]1:13   [3051]1:14
   [3052]1:15   [3053]1:24   [3054]2:14-18   [3055]2:16-21   [3056]2:31
   [3057]2:38   [3058]2:40   [3059]2:40   [3060]3:6   [3061]3:6
   [3062]3:6   [3063]3:21   [3064]4:34-35   [3065]4:34-35   [3066]4:37
   [3067]5   [3068]5   [3069]5:1-10   [3070]5:1-10   [3071]5:1-10
   [3072]5:4   [3073]5:29   [3074]5:37   [3075]6   [3076]6:1-2
   [3077]6:2   [3078]6:5   [3079]6:5   [3080]6:15   [3081]7:15-16
   [3082]7:29-30   [3083]7:45   [3084]7:55   [3085]7:56   [3086]7:59-60
   [3087]8:2   [3088]8:2   [3089]8:3   [3090]8:10   [3091]8:20
   [3092]8:26   [3093]8:26-30   [3094]8:27   [3095]8:27   [3096]8:27-38
   [3097]8:27-39   [3098]8:30-31   [3099]8:36   [3100]9:3-18   [3101]9:8
   [3102]9:15   [3103]9:15   [3104]9:15   [3105]9:15   [3106]9:15
   [3107]9:15   [3108]9:15   [3109]9:15   [3110]9:15   [3111]9:17
   [3112]9:17   [3113]9:17-18   [3114]9:32-34   [3115]9:36-41
   [3116]9:39   [3117]10   [3118]10:1   [3119]10:1-2   [3120]10:3-16
   [3121]10:4   [3122]10:10   [3123]10:15   [3124]10:26   [3125]10:34-35
   [3126]11:28   [3127]12   [3128]12:8   [3129]13:8-11   [3130]13:32
   [3131]13:46   [3132]13:46   [3133]14:11   [3134]15:10
   [3135]15:28-29   [3136]15:39   [3137]16:6-7   [3138]16:16
   [3139]16:25-38   [3140]17:22   [3141]17:28   [3142]17:28
   [3143]17:30   [3144]19:1   [3145]19:1-7   [3146]19:2   [3147]20:16
   [3148]20:28   [3149]20:28   [3150]20:35   [3151]21:5   [3152]21:8-9
   [3153]21:9   [3154]21:9   [3155]21:9   [3156]21:9   [3157]21:10-11
   [3158]21:13   [3159]21:13   [3160]23:2   [3161]23:5   [3162]24:17-18
   [3163]26:2-3   [3164]26:24   [3165]27:23   [3166]27:37   [3167]28:7
   [3168]28:30

   Romans

   [3169]1:7   [3170]1:8   [3171]1:8   [3172]1:8   [3173]1:8   [3174]1:8
   [3175]1:25   [3176]1:26-27   [3177]2:4-5   [3178]2:4-5   [3179]2:12
   [3180]2:24   [3181]2:28-29   [3182]3:1   [3183]3:2   [3184]3:4
   [3185]3:4   [3186]3:12   [3187]3:20   [3188]3:23   [3189]3:23
   [3190]3:23-24   [3191]3:24   [3192]3:28   [3193]3:30   [3194]4:11
   [3195]5:3-5   [3196]5:3-5   [3197]5:3-5   [3198]5:7   [3199]5:14
   [3200]5:14   [3201]5:14   [3202]5:14   [3203]5:14   [3204]5:14
   [3205]5:20   [3206]5:20   [3207]5:20   [3208]5:20   [3209]6:3-4
   [3210]6:4   [3211]6:4   [3212]6:4   [3213]6:11   [3214]6:14
   [3215]6:21-22   [3216]7   [3217]7:1-3   [3218]7:2   [3219]7:2
   [3220]7:2   [3221]7:2-3   [3222]7:4   [3223]7:6   [3224]7:6
   [3225]7:8   [3226]7:14   [3227]7:14   [3228]7:14   [3229]7:14-20
   [3230]7:18   [3231]7:18   [3232]7:18   [3233]7:19   [3234]7:19
   [3235]7:19   [3236]7:19   [3237]7:22-25   [3238]7:23   [3239]7:23
   [3240]7:23   [3241]7:23   [3242]7:24   [3243]7:24   [3244]7:24
   [3245]7:24   [3246]7:24   [3247]7:24   [3248]7:24   [3249]7:24
   [3250]7:25   [3251]8:1-2   [3252]8:3   [3253]8:5   [3254]8:8
   [3255]8:8-9   [3256]8:9   [3257]8:11   [3258]8:11   [3259]8:11
   [3260]8:14   [3261]8:17   [3262]8:18   [3263]8:18   [3264]8:18
   [3265]8:18   [3266]8:19-21   [3267]8:20   [3268]8:20   [3269]8:21
   [3270]8:26   [3271]8:28   [3272]8:35   [3273]8:35-36   [3274]8:38
   [3275]8:39   [3276]9:3   [3277]9:3   [3278]9:3-4   [3279]9:3-4
   [3280]9:11   [3281]9:13   [3282]9:14-29   [3283]9:16   [3284]9:16
   [3285]9:16   [3286]9:16   [3287]9:16   [3288]9:16   [3289]9:16
   [3290]9:20   [3291]9:20-21   [3292]9:21   [3293]9:22-23
   [3294]9:30-32   [3295]9:33   [3296]10:2   [3297]10:2   [3298]10:2
   [3299]10:2   [3300]10:2   [3301]10:10   [3302]11:6   [3303]11:20
   [3304]11:25-26   [3305]11:32   [3306]11:32   [3307]11:32
   [3308]11:32   [3309]11:32   [3310]11:33   [3311]11:33
   [3312]11:33-34   [3313]11:33-34   [3314]12:1   [3315]12:1
   [3316]12:1   [3317]12:1   [3318]12:1   [3319]12:1   [3320]12:1-3
   [3321]12:3   [3322]12:9   [3323]12:11   [3324]12:11-12   [3325]12:13
   [3326]12:15   [3327]12:15   [3328]12:17   [3329]12:17   [3330]12:18
   [3331]12:20   [3332]12:21   [3333]12:21   [3334]13:11-12
   [3335]13:12   [3336]13:14   [3337]13:14   [3338]14:2   [3339]14:2
   [3340]14:2   [3341]14:3   [3342]14:4   [3343]14:4   [3344]14:4
   [3345]14:4   [3346]14:4   [3347]14:5   [3348]14:5   [3349]14:5
   [3350]14:5   [3351]14:5   [3352]14:6   [3353]14:10   [3354]14:14
   [3355]14:20   [3356]14:21   [3357]14:21   [3358]14:21   [3359]14:21
   [3360]14:21   [3361]15:19   [3362]15:24   [3363]16:18   [3364]16:20
   [3365]16:20

   1 Corinthians

   [3366]1:1-3   [3367]1:7-8   [3368]1:19   [3369]1:19   [3370]1:21
   [3371]1:24   [3372]1:24   [3373]1:25   [3374]1:25   [3375]1:25
   [3376]1:25   [3377]1:25   [3378]1:26   [3379]1:27   [3380]1:30
   [3381]1:31   [3382]1:31   [3383]2:6-7   [3384]2:8-9   [3385]2:9
   [3386]2:9   [3387]2:9   [3388]2:9   [3389]2:9   [3390]2:13
   [3391]2:14   [3392]3:1-3   [3393]3:2   [3394]3:2   [3395]3:3
   [3396]3:6   [3397]3:6   [3398]3:6   [3399]3:6-10   [3400]3:10
   [3401]3:10   [3402]3:10-12   [3403]3:14   [3404]3:16   [3405]3:16-17
   [3406]3:17   [3407]3:17   [3408]3:17   [3409]3:18-19   [3410]4:1-2
   [3411]4:4   [3412]4:4   [3413]4:5   [3414]4:7   [3415]4:7   [3416]4:7
   [3417]4:8   [3418]4:9   [3419]4:10   [3420]4:12   [3421]4:12
   [3422]4:12   [3423]4:19   [3424]4:19   [3425]4:21   [3426]4:21
   [3427]5:1   [3428]5:1-2   [3429]5:4-5   [3430]5:5   [3431]5:5
   [3432]5:8   [3433]5:11   [3434]6:11   [3435]6:12   [3436]6:12
   [3437]6:12   [3438]6:12   [3439]6:12   [3440]6:13   [3441]6:13
   [3442]6:13   [3443]6:13   [3444]6:13-18   [3445]6:15   [3446]6:16
   [3447]6:16   [3448]6:17   [3449]6:17   [3450]6:17   [3451]6:18
   [3452]6:18   [3453]6:18   [3454]6:19   [3455]6:19   [3456]6:19
   [3457]6:20   [3458]7   [3459]7   [3460]7:1   [3461]7:1   [3462]7:1
   [3463]7:1-2   [3464]7:3   [3465]7:3   [3466]7:4   [3467]7:4
   [3468]7:5   [3469]7:5   [3470]7:5   [3471]7:5   [3472]7:5   [3473]7:6
   [3474]7:7   [3475]7:7   [3476]7:7   [3477]7:7   [3478]7:7
   [3479]7:7-8   [3480]7:8   [3481]7:8   [3482]7:8-9   [3483]7:8-9
   [3484]7:8-9   [3485]7:8-10   [3486]7:9   [3487]7:9   [3488]7:9
   [3489]7:9   [3490]7:10   [3491]7:11   [3492]7:13-14   [3493]7:14
   [3494]7:14   [3495]7:15   [3496]7:18   [3497]7:18   [3498]7:18
   [3499]7:19   [3500]7:20   [3501]7:21   [3502]7:21   [3503]7:21-22
   [3504]7:23   [3505]7:24   [3506]7:25   [3507]7:25   [3508]7:25
   [3509]7:25   [3510]7:25   [3511]7:25   [3512]7:25-26   [3513]7:26
   [3514]7:26   [3515]7:27   [3516]7:27   [3517]7:28   [3518]7:29
   [3519]7:29   [3520]7:29   [3521]7:29   [3522]7:29   [3523]7:29
   [3524]7:29   [3525]7:29   [3526]7:30   [3527]7:32-33   [3528]7:32-34
   [3529]7:34   [3530]7:34   [3531]7:34   [3532]7:34   [3533]7:35
   [3534]7:35   [3535]7:35   [3536]7:35   [3537]7:37-38   [3538]7:39
   [3539]7:39   [3540]7:39   [3541]7:39   [3542]7:39-40   [3543]7:39-40
   [3544]7:40   [3545]7:40   [3546]8:10   [3547]8:13   [3548]9:4-5
   [3549]9:5   [3550]9:5   [3551]9:5   [3552]9:5   [3553]9:5   [3554]9:9
   [3555]9:11   [3556]9:11   [3557]9:13   [3558]9:13   [3559]9:13
   [3560]9:13-14   [3561]9:14   [3562]9:14   [3563]9:19   [3564]9:24
   [3565]9:24   [3566]9:26   [3567]9:27   [3568]9:27   [3569]9:27
   [3570]9:27   [3571]9:27   [3572]9:27   [3573]9:27   [3574]10:4
   [3575]10:4   [3576]10:10   [3577]10:11   [3578]10:11   [3579]10:11
   [3580]10:12   [3581]10:12   [3582]10:13   [3583]10:13   [3584]10:21
   [3585]10:21   [3586]10:29   [3587]10:31   [3588]10:31   [3589]11:5-6
   [3590]11:6   [3591]11:7   [3592]11:14   [3593]11:16   [3594]11:27
   [3595]11:27   [3596]11:27-28   [3597]11:28   [3598]11:28
   [3599]11:28   [3600]12:4   [3601]12:4   [3602]12:4-5   [3603]12:11
   [3604]12:12   [3605]12:12-27   [3606]12:21   [3607]12:22-24
   [3608]12:28   [3609]12:28   [3610]12:29   [3611]13:4   [3612]13:4-7
   [3613]13:5   [3614]13:7   [3615]13:7   [3616]13:7   [3617]13:8
   [3618]13:8-10   [3619]13:9   [3620]13:9   [3621]13:9-10
   [3622]13:9-10   [3623]13:12   [3624]13:12   [3625]13:13   [3626]13:18
   [3627]14:1   [3628]14:5   [3629]14:15   [3630]14:15   [3631]14:16
   [3632]14:18   [3633]14:19   [3634]14:30-33   [3635]15:8-9
   [3636]15:9   [3637]15:9-10   [3638]15:9-10   [3639]15:10
   [3640]15:22   [3641]15:23   [3642]15:25-26   [3643]15:25-28
   [3644]15:28   [3645]15:31   [3646]15:31   [3647]15:33   [3648]15:33
   [3649]15:33   [3650]15:33   [3651]15:33   [3652]15:35   [3653]15:37
   [3654]15:39   [3655]15:40   [3656]15:41   [3657]15:41   [3658]15:42
   [3659]15:44   [3660]15:44   [3661]15:44   [3662]15:44   [3663]15:44
   [3664]15:47   [3665]15:50   [3666]15:50   [3667]15:50   [3668]15:51
   [3669]15:53   [3670]15:53   [3671]15:53   [3672]15:53
   [3673]15:53-54   [3674]15:54   [3675]15:54   [3676]15:55
   [3677]15:58   [3678]15:85

   2 Corinthians

   [3679]1:5   [3680]1:7   [3681]1:12   [3682]2:4   [3683]2:7
   [3684]2:7   [3685]2:7   [3686]2:7   [3687]2:7   [3688]2:10
   [3689]2:10   [3690]2:10   [3691]2:10-11   [3692]2:11   [3693]2:15
   [3694]2:16   [3695]2:16   [3696]3:2   [3697]3:2   [3698]3:4-6
   [3699]3:4-6   [3700]3:6   [3701]3:6   [3702]3:6   [3703]3:7
   [3704]3:7   [3705]3:10   [3706]3:11   [3707]3:14-15   [3708]3:18
   [3709]3:18   [3710]3:18   [3711]4:7   [3712]4:7   [3713]4:7
   [3714]4:7   [3715]4:7   [3716]4:16   [3717]4:16   [3718]4:16
   [3719]4:17-18   [3720]4:18   [3721]5:1   [3722]5:4   [3723]5:6
   [3724]5:6   [3725]5:10   [3726]5:17   [3727]5:17   [3728]6:8
   [3729]6:8   [3730]6:9   [3731]6:10   [3732]6:10   [3733]6:14
   [3734]6:14   [3735]6:14-15   [3736]6:14-15   [3737]6:14-15
   [3738]6:14-15   [3739]6:14-15   [3740]6:14-16   [3741]6:16
   [3742]8:12   [3743]8:13-14   [3744]8:14   [3745]8:14   [3746]8:14
   [3747]8:18   [3748]9:6   [3749]10:3   [3750]10:4-6   [3751]10:8
   [3752]10:12   [3753]10:14   [3754]10:14   [3755]10:17-18   [3756]11:2
   [3757]11:2   [3758]11:2   [3759]11:2   [3760]11:3   [3761]11:6
   [3762]11:14   [3763]11:14-15   [3764]11:23-27   [3765]11:27
   [3766]11:27   [3767]12:2   [3768]12:2   [3769]12:4   [3770]12:4
   [3771]12:7   [3772]12:7   [3773]12:7   [3774]12:8-10   [3775]12:9
   [3776]12:10   [3777]12:10   [3778]12:10   [3779]12:10   [3780]12:11
   [3781]12:14   [3782]12:14   [3783]12:21   [3784]13:1   [3785]13:3
   [3786]13:3

   Galatians

   [3787]1:8   [3788]1:8   [3789]1:8   [3790]1:10   [3791]1:10
   [3792]1:10   [3793]1:10   [3794]1:15   [3795]1:16   [3796]1:17-18
   [3797]1:18-19   [3798]1:19   [3799]2   [3800]2   [3801]2:1-2
   [3802]2:2   [3803]2:2   [3804]2:9   [3805]2:9-10   [3806]2:13
   [3807]2:16   [3808]2:16   [3809]2:16   [3810]2:20   [3811]2:21
   [3812]3:3-4   [3813]3:10   [3814]3:13   [3815]3:13   [3816]3:22
   [3817]3:24   [3818]3:27   [3819]3:27   [3820]3:28   [3821]4:16
   [3822]4:16   [3823]4:16   [3824]4:19   [3825]4:19   [3826]4:22-26
   [3827]4:26   [3828]4:26   [3829]4:26   [3830]4:26   [3831]5:4
   [3832]5:7   [3833]5:15   [3834]5:15   [3835]5:15   [3836]5:16-17
   [3837]5:16-17   [3838]5:17   [3839]5:17   [3840]5:17   [3841]5:19
   [3842]5:19   [3843]5:19-23   [3844]5:24   [3845]5:24-25   [3846]6:2
   [3847]6:7   [3848]6:7-8   [3849]6:10   [3850]6:10   [3851]6:10
   [3852]6:10   [3853]6:14   [3854]6:14   [3855]6:15

   Ephesians

   [3856]1:4   [3857]1:10   [3858]1:21   [3859]1:21   [3860]1:23
   [3861]2:3-4   [3862]2:5   [3863]2:14   [3864]3:10   [3865]3:20
   [3866]4:7   [3867]4:11   [3868]4:13   [3869]4:14   [3870]4:14
   [3871]4:22   [3872]4:22   [3873]4:26   [3874]4:26   [3875]4:26
   [3876]4:26   [3877]5:5   [3878]5:5   [3879]5:8   [3880]5:13
   [3881]5:14   [3882]5:14   [3883]5:18   [3884]5:18   [3885]5:18
   [3886]5:18   [3887]5:18   [3888]5:19   [3889]5:22   [3890]5:23-24
   [3891]5:25   [3892]5:27   [3893]5:27   [3894]5:27   [3895]5:31
   [3896]5:31-32   [3897]5:31-32   [3898]5:32   [3899]6:1   [3900]6:4
   [3901]6:6   [3902]6:12   [3903]6:12   [3904]6:12   [3905]6:12
   [3906]6:12   [3907]6:13-17   [3908]6:14-17   [3909]6:16   [3910]6:16
   [3911]6:16   [3912]6:16   [3913]6:24

   Philippians

   [3914]1:1   [3915]1:21   [3916]1:23   [3917]1:23   [3918]1:23
   [3919]1:23   [3920]1:23   [3921]1:23   [3922]2:6   [3923]2:6-8
   [3924]2:7-8   [3925]2:13   [3926]2:13   [3927]2:14-15   [3928]2:15
   [3929]2:18   [3930]2:21   [3931]2:27   [3932]2:44   [3933]3:8
   [3934]3:12-13   [3935]3:12-16   [3936]3:13   [3937]3:13   [3938]3:13
   [3939]3:13   [3940]3:14   [3941]3:19   [3942]3:19   [3943]3:19
   [3944]3:19   [3945]3:19   [3946]3:20   [3947]3:20   [3948]3:20
   [3949]3:20   [3950]3:20-21   [3951]3:21   [3952]4:7   [3953]4:8
   [3954]4:18

   Colossians

   [3955]1:16   [3956]1:18   [3957]1:21-22   [3958]1:26   [3959]2:5
   [3960]2:5   [3961]2:11   [3962]2:11   [3963]2:13-14   [3964]2:14-15
   [3965]2:18   [3966]3:1   [3967]3:5   [3968]3:5   [3969]3:5-6
   [3970]3:9-11   [3971]3:14   [3972]4:2   [3973]4:6   [3974]4:14

   1 Thessalonians

   [3975]2:9   [3976]2:9   [3977]2:18   [3978]3:4   [3979]4:4
   [3980]4:7   [3981]4:9   [3982]4:13   [3983]4:13   [3984]4:13
   [3985]4:13   [3986]4:13   [3987]4:15   [3988]4:16   [3989]4:17
   [3990]4:17   [3991]4:17   [3992]5:15   [3993]5:17   [3994]5:17
   [3995]5:17   [3996]5:17   [3997]5:17   [3998]5:21   [3999]5:21
   [4000]5:21   [4001]5:23   [4002]5:23

   2 Thessalonians

   [4003]2:3   [4004]2:7   [4005]2:7   [4006]2:7-8   [4007]3:3
   [4008]3:10   [4009]3:10   [4010]3:10

   1 Timothy

   [4011]1:15   [4012]1:17   [4013]1:19   [4014]1:19-20   [4015]2:4
   [4016]2:8   [4017]2:10   [4018]2:12   [4019]2:13   [4020]2:14
   [4021]2:15   [4022]2:15   [4023]2:15   [4024]3:1   [4025]3:1
   [4026]3:1-7   [4027]3:1-7   [4028]3:2   [4029]3:2   [4030]3:2
   [4031]3:2   [4032]3:2   [4033]3:2-3   [4034]3:3   [4035]3:4
   [4036]3:4   [4037]3:4   [4038]3:6   [4039]3:8-10   [4040]3:11
   [4041]3:12   [4042]3:13   [4043]4:3   [4044]4:3   [4045]4:3
   [4046]4:3   [4047]4:4   [4048]4:4   [4049]4:4   [4050]4:4   [4051]4:5
   [4052]4:12   [4053]4:12   [4054]4:14   [4055]4:14   [4056]5:2
   [4057]5:2   [4058]5:3   [4059]5:3-5   [4060]5:5   [4061]5:5
   [4062]5:6   [4063]5:6   [4064]5:6   [4065]5:6   [4066]5:6   [4067]5:9
   [4068]5:9   [4069]5:9-10   [4070]5:9-10   [4071]5:11   [4072]5:11
   [4073]5:11   [4074]5:11-12   [4075]5:11-12   [4076]5:11-12
   [4077]5:11-12   [4078]5:13   [4079]5:14   [4080]5:14   [4081]5:14
   [4082]5:14-15   [4083]5:14-15   [4084]5:14-15   [4085]5:14-15
   [4086]5:15   [4087]5:15   [4088]5:15   [4089]5:15   [4090]5:16
   [4091]5:17   [4092]5:18   [4093]5:19-20   [4094]5:19-20   [4095]5:22
   [4096]5:23   [4097]5:23   [4098]5:23   [4099]5:23   [4100]5:23
   [4101]5:24   [4102]5:24-25   [4103]6:7   [4104]6:8   [4105]6:8
   [4106]6:8   [4107]6:8   [4108]6:8   [4109]6:8   [4110]6:8   [4111]6:8
   [4112]6:9   [4113]6:9   [4114]6:10   [4115]6:10   [4116]6:15
   [4117]6:16   [4118]6:16   [4119]6:17-19   [4120]6:20-21

   2 Timothy

   [4121]1:15   [4122]2:4   [4123]2:20   [4124]2:20   [4125]2:20
   [4126]2:20   [4127]2:20   [4128]2:20-21   [4129]2:20-21
   [4130]2:20-21   [4131]2:21   [4132]2:23   [4133]3:6-7   [4134]3:6-7
   [4135]3:6-7   [4136]3:7   [4137]3:14   [4138]3:14-15   [4139]4:2
   [4140]4:3   [4141]4:7-8   [4142]4:7-8   [4143]4:7-8   [4144]4:13
   [4145]4:14

   Titus

   [4146]1:5   [4147]1:5-7   [4148]1:5-9   [4149]1:6   [4150]1:6
   [4151]1:7   [4152]1:7   [4153]1:9   [4154]1:9   [4155]1:9-14
   [4156]1:12   [4157]1:12   [4158]1:15   [4159]1:15   [4160]2:11-12
   [4161]2:15   [4162]3:4-7   [4163]3:10   [4164]3:10-11

   Philemon

   [4165]1:10   [4166]1:12   [4167]1:12

   Hebrews

   [4168]1:3   [4169]2:1   [4170]2:1   [4171]4:13   [4172]5:10   [4173]6
   [4174]6:4   [4175]6:9   [4176]7:3   [4177]9:3-5   [4178]9:7
   [4179]11:8   [4180]11:17-19   [4181]11:32   [4182]11:32   [4183]12:6
   [4184]12:6   [4185]12:6   [4186]12:6   [4187]12:6   [4188]12:6
   [4189]12:14   [4190]12:14   [4191]12:18   [4192]13   [4193]13:4
   [4194]13:4   [4195]13:4   [4196]13:4   [4197]13:4   [4198]13:4
   [4199]13:4

   James

   [4200]1:12   [4201]1:16-18   [4202]1:19   [4203]1:20   [4204]1:20
   [4205]1:22   [4206]2:10   [4207]2:10   [4208]2:10   [4209]2:10
   [4210]2:10   [4211]2:11   [4212]2:17   [4213]2:23   [4214]2:23
   [4215]2:25   [4216]2:26   [4217]3:2   [4218]3:2   [4219]3:2
   [4220]3:2   [4221]3:2   [4222]3:2   [4223]3:2   [4224]3:5   [4225]3:6
   [4226]3:7   [4227]3:8   [4228]3:8-9   [4229]4:1   [4230]4:6
   [4231]4:6   [4232]4:11   [4233]4:13-16

   1 Peter

   [4234]1:2   [4235]1:3-5   [4236]1:13-16   [4237]1:16   [4238]1:18-19
   [4239]1:22-23   [4240]1:24   [4241]2:8   [4242]2:9   [4243]2:9
   [4244]2:9   [4245]2:17-18   [4246]2:21   [4247]2:22   [4248]2:22
   [4249]2:22   [4250]2:22   [4251]2:23   [4252]2:23   [4253]3:2-3
   [4254]3:3   [4255]3:7   [4256]3:7   [4257]3:7   [4258]3:7   [4259]3:7
   [4260]3:15   [4261]3:15   [4262]3:20   [4263]3:20   [4264]3:20-21
   [4265]3:20-21   [4266]4:1   [4267]4:8   [4268]4:10   [4269]4:10
   [4270]5:1   [4271]5:1-2   [4272]5:4   [4273]5:5   [4274]5:5
   [4275]5:6   [4276]5:8   [4277]5:8   [4278]5:8

   2 Peter

   [4279]1:4   [4280]1:4   [4281]2:4   [4282]2:7-8   [4283]2:9
   [4284]2:9   [4285]2:17-18   [4286]3:3   [4287]3:9

   1 John

   [4288]1:5   [4289]1:7   [4290]1:8   [4291]1:8   [4292]1:8   [4293]1:9
   [4294]2:1   [4295]2:1-2   [4296]2:4   [4297]2:6   [4298]2:6
   [4299]2:6   [4300]2:15   [4301]2:15-17   [4302]2:19   [4303]2:27
   [4304]3:2   [4305]3:2   [4306]3:2-3   [4307]3:8   [4308]3:9-10
   [4309]3:15   [4310]4:3   [4311]4:7   [4312]4:13   [4313]4:15
   [4314]4:18   [4315]4:18   [4316]4:18   [4317]5:3   [4318]5:16
   [4319]5:18   [4320]5:18-19   [4321]5:19   [4322]5:19   [4323]5:19
   [4324]5:21   [4325]14:6

   2 John

   [4326]1:1   [4327]1:1   [4328]1:10

   3 John

   [4329]1:1

   Jude

   [4330]1:5   [4331]1:5   [4332]1:6   [4333]1:6   [4334]1:7   [4335]1:9
   [4336]1:23   [4337]1:24

   Revelation

   [4338]1:4   [4339]1:5   [4340]1:6   [4341]1:7   [4342]1:8
   [4343]1:9-10   [4344]1:12   [4345]1:14   [4346]1:15   [4347]1:16
   [4348]2:2   [4349]2:4   [4350]2:5   [4351]2:6   [4352]2:6   [4353]2:6
   [4354]2:8   [4355]2:8   [4356]2:9   [4357]2:9   [4358]2:10
   [4359]2:13   [4360]2:14   [4361]2:14   [4362]2:15   [4363]2:15
   [4364]2:15   [4365]2:16   [4366]2:17   [4367]2:20   [4368]2:23
   [4369]2:25-26   [4370]2:27   [4371]3:4   [4372]3:4   [4373]3:7
   [4374]3:7   [4375]3:15-16   [4376]3:16   [4377]3:17   [4378]3:19
   [4379]3:20   [4380]3:22   [4381]3:33   [4382]3:33   [4383]5:1
   [4384]6:10   [4385]7:5   [4386]10:9-10   [4387]10:9-10   [4388]11:2
   [4389]11:7-8   [4390]11:7-8   [4391]12:9   [4392]14:1   [4393]14:1
   [4394]14:1-4   [4395]14:3   [4396]14:3   [4397]14:3-4   [4398]14:4
   [4399]14:4   [4400]14:4   [4401]14:4   [4402]14:4   [4403]14:4
   [4404]14:4   [4405]14:4   [4406]14:6   [4407]17   [4408]17:4-5
   [4409]17:9   [4410]18   [4411]18:2   [4412]18:4   [4413]19:11-16
   [4414]21:2   [4415]21:14   [4416]21:14   [4417]21:16-18
   [4418]21:19-20   [4419]21:19-21   [4420]22:13   [4421]22:14
   [4422]22:18-19

   Judith

   [4423]13   [4424]13   [4425]13

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [4426]1:11   [4427]1:11   [4428]2:23   [4429]2:24   [4430]3:21
   [4431]4:9   [4432]4:9   [4433]4:9   [4434]4:11   [4435]4:11
   [4436]4:11   [4437]4:11-14   [4438]4:13   [4439]4:13   [4440]4:14
   [4441]4:14   [4442]4:14   [4443]5:4   [4444]6:6   [4445]6:7
   [4446]7:1   [4447]8:7   [4448]8:7   [4449]9:15   [4450]10:1
   [4451]10:1   [4452]10:7

   Baruch

   [4453]5:5   [4454]6

   Susanna

   [4455]1:54   [4456]1:55   [4457]1:58   [4458]1:59

   Bel and the Dragon

   [4459]1:33-36   [4460]1:33-39

   2 Maccabees

   [4461]5:17   [4462]7

   2 Esdras

   [4463]1:30

   Sirach

   [4464]1:18   [4465]2:1   [4466]2:1   [4467]3:30   [4468]3:30
   [4469]3:30   [4470]4:25   [4471]7:36   [4472]8:7   [4473]8:14
   [4474]8:17   [4475]9:2-3   [4476]10:1   [4477]10:9   [4478]10:30
   [4479]11:25   [4480]13:1   [4481]13:2   [4482]22:6   [4483]22:6
   [4484]25:9   [4485]27:5   [4486]27:25   [4487]46:1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * agapetos: [4488]1
     * agonothetes: [4489]1
     * adiaphora: [4490]1
     * aei: [4491]1
     * anamartetos: [4492]1
     * anachorein: [4493]1
     * apo tou ponerou: [4494]1
     * aperispastos: [4495]1
     * aponia: [4496]1
     * arto-turos: [4497]1
     * archaios: [4498]1
     * ataraxia: [4499]1
     * autarkes: [4500]1
     * eis to sophronein: [4501]1
     * ento poneeo: [4502]1
     * episkopos: [4503]1
     * eschematismenos: [4504]1
     * erhista: [4505]1
     * hedone: [4506]1
     * ono lura: [4507]1
     * onterione: [4508]1
     * ho protoplastos: [4509]1
     * omoiousios: [4510]1
     * ophis: [4511]1 [4512]2
     * homoousios: [4513]1
     * hudrophobous: [4514]1
     * hupostasis: [4515]1 [4516]2
     * hupotuposeis: [4517]1
     * 'olbios: [4518]1
     * 'Adamantios: [4519]1
     * 'Apatheia: [4520]1
     * 'Arche: [4521]1
     * 'Iesous Christos Theou Uos Soter: [4522]1
     * 'agoranmoi: [4523]1
     * 'epitome: [4524]1
     * Edei hemas, agapete, me te oi& 208;sei ton kleron pheresthai:
       [4525]1
     * onos luras ekouse kai salpingos hus: [4526]1
     * Ono lura: [4527]1
     * A'genealogetos: [4528]1
     * Theoboule: [4529]1
     * Therapeia: [4530]1 [4531]2
     * IChThUS: [4532]1
     * Meden agan: [4533]1
     * Meden 'agan: [4534]1
     * Oidema: [4535]1
     * Peri apatheias: [4536]1
     * Peri apoches empsuchion: [4537]1
     * Peri 'Archon: [4538]1 [4539]2 [4540]3 [4541]4
     * Peri Archon: [4542]1
     * Pros to euschemon kai euprosedron to Kuri& 251; aperispastos':
       [4543]1
     * aidesimotate Pappa: [4544]1
     * autexousion: [4545]1
     * anamartetos: [4546]1
     * banausoi: [4547]1
     * gumnastikos: [4548]1
     * gune: [4549]1
     * gunaikas: [4550]1
     * demas: [4551]1
     * deo: [4552]1
     * diapsalma: [4553]1
     * didaktikon: [4554]1
     * dogmatikos: [4555]1
     * episkopountes: [4556]1
     * kai memeristai: [4557]1
     * kosmion: [4558]1
     * kairo: [4559]1
     * kakia: [4560]1 [4561]2 [4562]3
     * kakozelian: [4563]1
     * kakosin: [4564]1
     * katastreniasosi: [4565]1
     * kleros: [4566]1 [4567]2 [4568]3 [4569]4
     * koinos bios: [4570]1
     * kurio: [4571]1
     * logos: [4572]1
     * lupe: [4573]1
     * logismoi: [4574]1
     * meden agan: [4575]1
     * nephaleon: [4576]1
     * nephalios: [4577]1
     * nephalios: [4578]1
     * nous: [4579]1
     * oidema: [4580]1
     * oi& 208;sis: [4581]1
     * oiesis: [4582]1
     * ouk erista: [4583]1
     * ousia: [4584]1 [4585]2 [4586]3 [4587]4
     * pathe: [4588]1 [4589]2
     * piptein: [4590]1
     * parakeklemene: [4591]1
     * paraleipomenon: [4592]1
     * pararruomai: [4593]1
     * patria: [4594]1
     * perates: [4595]1
     * peri archon: [4596]1
     * peri 'Archon: [4597]1 [4598]2 [4599]3 [4600]4
     * peri 'Archon: [4601]1
     * pelos: [4602]1
     * poikile: [4603]1
     * poikiles: [4604]1
     * polu pleiona: [4605]1
     * prinos: [4606]1
     * prisai: [4607]1
     * proarthra: [4608]1
     * prosopon: [4609]1
     * proegmena: [4610]1
     * propatheiai: [4611]1
     * ptoma: [4612]1
     * rema: [4613]1
     * sabbaton deuteroproton: [4614]1
     * sun ton ouranon kai sun ten gen: [4615]1
     * sunodos: [4616]1
     * sophrona: [4617]1
     * sema: [4618]1
     * soma: [4619]1
     * skopos: [4620]1
     * stromateis: [4621]1
     * stromateis: [4622]1
     * scheptomai: [4623]1
     * schinos: [4624]1
     * schisai: [4625]1
     * schinos: [4626]1
     * sophrosune: [4627]1
     * to prepon: [4628]1
     * tomoi: [4629]1
     * te energei& 139;: [4630]1
     * te dunamei: [4631]1
     * ton anabaOmon: [4632]1
     * tou gar kai genos esmen: [4633]1
     * chalkenteros: [4634]1
     * chara: [4635]1
     * cheima oporismos stilpnotes: [4636]1
     * psuchai apo tou psuchesthai: [4637]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

     * 'lh smvt: [4638]1
     * hrs: [4639]1
     * lrlm: [4640]1
     * nll: [4641]1
     * nlh: [4642]1
     * nmy: [4643]1
     * ntmy: [4644]1
     * : [4645]1
     * l ssygyt: [4646]1
     * yr: [4647]1
     * tsl': [4648]1
     * qvl: [4649]1
     * rtshych: [4650]1
     * t: [4651]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [4652]i  [4653]iii  [4654]v  [4655]xi  [4656]xii  [4657]xiii
   [4658]xiv  [4659]xv  [4660]xvi  [4661]xvii  [4662]xviii  [4663]xix
   [4664]xx  [4665]xxi  [4666]xxii  [4667]xxiii  [4668]xxiv  [4669]xxv
   [4670]xxvi  [4671]xxvii  [4672]xxviii  [4673]xxix  [4674]xxx
   [4675]xxxi  [4676]xxxii  [4677]xxxiii  [4678]xxxiv  [4679]1  [4680]2
   [4681]3  [4682]4  [4683]5  [4684]6  [4685]7  [4686]8  [4687]9
   [4688]10  [4689]11  [4690]12  [4691]13  [4692]14  [4693]15  [4694]16
   [4695]17  [4696]18  [4697]19  [4698]20  [4699]21  [4700]22  [4701]23
   [4702]24  [4703]25  [4704]26  [4705]27  [4706]28  [4707]29  [4708]30
   [4709]31  [4710]32  [4711]33  [4712]34  [4713]35  [4714]36  [4715]37
   [4716]38  [4717]39  [4718]40  [4719]41  [4720]42  [4721]43  [4722]44
   [4723]45  [4724]46  [4725]47  [4726]48  [4727]49  [4728]50  [4729]51
   [4730]52  [4731]53  [4732]54  [4733]55  [4734]56  [4735]57  [4736]58
   [4737]59  [4738]60  [4739]61  [4740]62  [4741]63  [4742]64  [4743]65
   [4744]66  [4745]67  [4746]68  [4747]69  [4748]70  [4749]71  [4750]72
   [4751]73  [4752]74  [4753]75  [4754]76  [4755]77  [4756]78  [4757]79
   [4758]80  [4759]81  [4760]82  [4761]83  [4762]84  [4763]85  [4764]86
   [4765]87  [4766]88  [4767]89  [4768]90  [4769]91  [4770]92  [4771]93
   [4772]94  [4773]95  [4774]96  [4775]97  [4776]98  [4777]99  [4778]100
   [4779]101  [4780]102  [4781]103  [4782]104  [4783]105  [4784]106
   [4785]107  [4786]108  [4787]109  [4788]110  [4789]111  [4790]112
   [4791]113  [4792]114  [4793]115  [4794]116  [4795]117  [4796]118
   [4797]119  [4798]120  [4799]121  [4800]122  [4801]123  [4802]124
   [4803]125  [4804]126  [4805]127  [4806]128  [4807]129  [4808]130
   [4809]131  [4810]132  [4811]133  [4812]134  [4813]135  [4814]136
   [4815]137  [4816]138  [4817]139  [4818]140  [4819]141  [4820]142
   [4821]143  [4822]144  [4823]145  [4824]146  [4825]147  [4826]148
   [4827]149  [4828]150  [4829]151  [4830]152  [4831]153  [4832]154
   [4833]155  [4834]156  [4835]157  [4836]158  [4837]159  [4838]160
   [4839]161  [4840]162  [4841]163  [4842]164  [4843]165  [4844]166
   [4845]167  [4846]168  [4847]169  [4848]170  [4849]171  [4850]172
   [4851]173  [4852]174  [4853]175  [4854]176  [4855]177  [4856]178
   [4857]179  [4858]180  [4859]181  [4860]182  [4861]183  [4862]184
   [4863]185  [4864]186  [4865]187  [4866]188  [4867]189  [4868]190
   [4869]191  [4870]192  [4871]193  [4872]194  [4873]195  [4874]196
   [4875]197  [4876]198  [4877]199  [4878]200  [4879]201  [4880]202
   [4881]203  [4882]204  [4883]205  [4884]206  [4885]207  [4886]208
   [4887]209  [4888]210  [4889]211  [4890]212  [4891]213  [4892]214
   [4893]215  [4894]216  [4895]217  [4896]218  [4897]219  [4898]220
   [4899]221  [4900]222  [4901]223  [4902]224  [4903]225  [4904]226
   [4905]227  [4906]228  [4907]229  [4908]230  [4909]231  [4910]232
   [4911]233  [4912]234  [4913]235  [4914]236  [4915]237  [4916]238
   [4917]239  [4918]240  [4919]241  [4920]242  [4921]243  [4922]244
   [4923]245  [4924]246  [4925]247  [4926]248  [4927]249  [4928]250
   [4929]251  [4930]252  [4931]253  [4932]254  [4933]255  [4934]256
   [4935]257  [4936]258  [4937]259  [4938]260  [4939]261  [4940]262
   [4941]263  [4942]264  [4943]265  [4944]266  [4945]267  [4946]268
   [4947]269  [4948]270  [4949]271  [4950]272  [4951]273  [4952]274
   [4953]275  [4954]276  [4955]277  [4956]278  [4957]279  [4958]280
   [4959]281  [4960]282  [4961]283  [4962]284  [4963]285  [4964]286
   [4965]287  [4966]288  [4967]289  [4968]290  [4969]291  [4970]292
   [4971]293  [4972]294  [4973]295  [4974]297  [4975]299  [4976]300
   [4977]301  [4978]302  [4979]303  [4980]304  [4981]305  [4982]306
   [4983]307  [4984]308  [4985]309  [4986]310  [4987]311  [4988]312
   [4989]313  [4990]314  [4991]315  [4992]316  [4993]317  [4994]318
   [4995]319  [4996]320  [4997]321  [4998]322  [4999]323  [5000]324
   [5001]325  [5002]326  [5003]327  [5004]328  [5005]329  [5006]330
   [5007]331  [5008]332  [5009]333  [5010]334  [5011]335  [5012]336
   [5013]337  [5014]338  [5015]339  [5016]340  [5017]341  [5018]342
   [5019]343  [5020]344  [5021]345  [5022]346  [5023]347  [5024]348
   [5025]349  [5026]350  [5027]351  [5028]352  [5029]353  [5030]354
   [5031]355  [5032]356  [5033]357  [5034]358  [5035]359  [5036]360
   [5037]361  [5038]362  [5039]363  [5040]364  [5041]365  [5042]366
   [5043]367  [5044]368  [5045]369  [5046]370  [5047]371  [5048]372
   [5049]373  [5050]374  [5051]375  [5052]376  [5053]377  [5054]378
   [5055]379  [5056]380  [5057]381  [5058]382  [5059]383  [5060]384
   [5061]385  [5062]386  [5063]387  [5064]388  [5065]389  [5066]390
   [5067]391  [5068]392  [5069]393  [5070]394  [5071]395  [5072]396
   [5073]397  [5074]398  [5075]399  [5076]400  [5077]401  [5078]402
   [5079]403  [5080]404  [5081]405  [5082]406  [5083]407  [5084]408
   [5085]409  [5086]410  [5087]411  [5088]412  [5089]413  [5090]414
   [5091]415  [5092]416  [5093]417  [5094]418  [5095]419  [5096]420
   [5097]421  [5098]422  [5099]423  [5100]424  [5101]425  [5102]426
   [5103]427  [5104]428  [5105]429  [5106]430  [5107]431  [5108]432
   [5109]433  [5110]434  [5111]435  [5112]436  [5113]437  [5114]438
   [5115]439  [5116]440  [5117]441  [5118]442  [5119]443  [5120]444
   [5121]445  [5122]446  [5123]447  [5124]448  [5125]449  [5126]450
   [5127]451  [5128]452  [5129]453  [5130]454  [5131]455  [5132]456
   [5133]457  [5134]458  [5135]459  [5136]460  [5137]461  [5138]462
   [5139]463  [5140]464  [5141]465  [5142]466  [5143]467  [5144]468
   [5145]469  [5146]470  [5147]471  [5148]472  [5149]473  [5150]474
   [5151]475  [5152]476  [5153]477  [5154]478  [5155]479  [5156]480
   [5157]481  [5158]482  [5159]483  [5160]484  [5161]485  [5162]486
   [5163]487  [5164]488  [5165]489  [5166]490  [5167]491  [5168]492
   [5169]493  [5170]494  [5171]495  [5172]496  [5173]497  [5174]498
   [5175]499  [5176]500  [5177]501  [5178]502
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.LIII-p73.1
   2. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.LVII-p93.1
   3. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.LXIX-p52.1
   4. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi.iv-p68.1
   5. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.LI-p54.1
   6. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.XLVIII-p165.1
   7. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.LI-p67.1
   8. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.XLIII-p11.1
   9. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=27#v.CXXIV-p60.1
  10. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.XXII-p151.1
  11. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.LI-p35.1
  12. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.XLVIII-p16.1
  13. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.LII-p84.1
  14. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.LXVI-p21.1
  15. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.LXIX-p31.1
  16. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.CVII-p78.1
  17. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.CXXIII-p87.1
  18. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#vi.v-p110.1
  19. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#vi.vi.I-p30.1
  20. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=28#vi.vi.I-p46.1
  21. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=31#v.XLVIII-p110.1
  22. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.LIII-p73.1
  23. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p130.1
  24. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.LXIX-p55.1
  25. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.LXIX-p58.1
  26. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.LI-p49.1
  27. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.LXIX-p58.1
  28. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.LI-p50.1
  29. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.LIII-p10.1
  30. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.CXXV-p23.1
  31. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.LI-p50.1
  32. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.LI-p52.1
  33. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.XXII-p149.1
  34. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.LI-p44.1
  35. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.CXXIII-p70.1
  36. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.LI-p43.1
  37. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=24#v.CXXIII-p71.1
  38. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=24#vi.vi.I-p44.1
  39. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vi.iv-p188.2
  40. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vii.iv.iv-p15.2
  41. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.XXII-p269.1
  42. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.III-p38.1
  43. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.LI-p45.1
  44. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.VII-p13.1
  45. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.XXII-p24.1
  46. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.XXXVIII-p27.1
  47. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.XXII-p148.1
  48. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.XLVIII-p126.1
  49. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.CXXX-p85.1
  50. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.XXII-p24.1
  51. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.CXXV-p44.1
  52. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.XXII-p152.1
  53. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.XVII-p18.1
  54. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.LXXIX-p49.1
  55. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.CXXIII-p73.1
  56. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.LI-p42.1
  57. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.CXXVIII-p18.1
  58. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=23#v.LI-p46.1
  59. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.LI-p48.1
  60. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.XXXIX-p50.1
  61. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.LX-p19.1
  62. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=25#v.CXXVIII-p19.1
  63. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.XXXV-p3.1
  64. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.LXVI-p97.1
  65. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.CXLVII-p62.1
  66. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.XXXVI-p3.1
  67. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.XLVI-p59.1
  68. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.CXXIII-p74.1
  69. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=25#v.LI-p67.1
  70. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=4&scrV=26#vi.vi.I-p136.1
  71. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.LI-p68.1
  72. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.LI-p67.1
  73. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=5&scrV=27#v.LX-p88.1
  74. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p179.1
  75. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p156.1
  76. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=3#vi.viii-p104.1
  77. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v.X-p6.1
  78. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p156.1
  79. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.LIII-p77.1
  80. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.XLVIII-p167.1
  81. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.XXII-p166.1
  82. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.CXXIII-p80.1
  83. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.LI-p57.1
  84. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=13#v.CXXIII-p79.1
  85. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=23#v.XV-p22.1
  86. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v.LIII-p79.1
  87. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=8#v.LXIX-p60.1
  88. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=11#v.LXIX-p60.1
  89. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=20#v.CXXIII-p81.1
  90. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=21#v.LXXIX-p90.1
  91. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=21#vi.vi.II-p157.1
  92. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=21#vi.ix.I_1-p252.1
  93. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p46.1
  94. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p47.1
  95. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p48.1
  96. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p157.1
  97. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=4#v.LI-p69.1
  98. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=7#v.LI-p35.1
  99. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=7#v.CXXIII-p87.1
 100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=20#v.XXII-p77.1
 101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=9&scrV=20#v.LXIX-p116.1
 102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.LIII-p74.1
 103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=10&scrV=11#v.XLVI-p10.1
 104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.LIII-p75.1
 105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.XLVI-p11.1
 106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=4#v.XLVI-p11.1
 107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=9#v.XLVI-p9.1
 108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=10#v.LI-p70.1
 109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=31#v.XXII-p6.1
 110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.XXII-p6.1
 111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.XLVI-p8.1
 112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.LXXI-p31.1
 113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p329.1
 114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.CXXV-p151.1
 115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.XXXIX-p71.1
 116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=4#vi.v-p87.1
 117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v.LXVI-p85.1
 118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vi.v-p86.1
 119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=10#v.LXXI-p22.1
 120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=11#vi.v-p86.1
 121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=2#v.CVIII-p118.1
 122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=13#v.LXVI-p91.1
 123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=14#vi.v-p88.1
 124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=18#v.XLVI-p22.1
 125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=16#v.XXXV-p5.1
 126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=16#v.XXXVI-p4.2
 127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=16&scrV=12#v.CXXVI-p12.1
 128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=1#vi.ix.III-p98.1
 129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=1#vi.ix.III-p94.1
 130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=17#vi.ix.I_1-p253.1
 131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p111.1
 132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=1#v.CXXII-p11.1
 133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=1#v.LXVI-p81.1
 134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=11#vi.v-p116.1
 135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=12#vi.ix.I_1-p253.1
 136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=23#vi.vi.II-p172.1
 137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=18&scrV=23#v.CVIII-p116.1
 138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=15#v.CXXII-p8.1
 139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=17#v.XXII-p8.1
 140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=18#vi.vi.II-p258.1
 141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=26#v.XXII-p20.1
 142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=30#v.XXII-p79.1
 143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=30#v.CVIII-p120.1
 144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=30#v.LXIX-p117.1
 145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=0#v.LIII-p78.1
 146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=20&scrV=11#vi.v-p98.1
 147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=3#v.LXVI-p90.1
 148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=6#v.LXVI-p90.1
 149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=12#vi.v-p117.1
 150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=31#v.LXIX-p67.1
 151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v.XXXVIII-p4.1
 152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=0#v.LXVI-p48.1
 153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=1#v.CXXX-p51.1
 154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=23&scrV=0#v.LIII-p81.1
 155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=23&scrV=19#v.LXVI-p87.1
 156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=0#v.LIII-p81.1
 157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=15#v.LXIX-p69.1
 158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=42#vi.vi.I-p278.1
 159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=1#v.XXII-p182.1
 160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=22#v.CXXV-p98.1
 161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=22#v.CXXIII-p104.1
 162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=23#vi.vi.I-p49.1
 163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=34#v.XXXIX-p62.1
 164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=26&scrV=0#v.LIII-p80.1
 165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=26&scrV=8#v.XXII-p227.1
 166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=26&scrV=12#v.LXVI-p47.1
 167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=26&scrV=15#v.LXIX-p66.1
 168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=26&scrV=18#v.LXIX-p66.1
 169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=0#v.XXXV-p7.1
 170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=0#v.LXVIII-p7.1
 171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=36#v.LXIX-p71.1
 172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=27&scrV=41#v.CVIII-p195.1
 173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p195.1
 174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=11#v.CXXIII-p138.1
 175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=12#v.III-p26.1
 176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=12#v.XXII-p44.1
 177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=12#v.LIV-p41.1
 178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=12#v.CVIII-p149.1
 179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=12#v.CXVIII-p53.1
 180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=20#vi.ix.III-p57.1
 181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=20#v.XXII-p314.1
 182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=29&scrV=10#v.LXIX-p70.1
 183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=29&scrV=11#vi.v-p89.1
 184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=29&scrV=15#vi.v-p90.1
 185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=29&scrV=17#v.CXXIII-p103.1
 186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=29&scrV=20#v.XXII-p379.1
 187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=30&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p50.1
 188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=30&scrV=1#v.XXII-p184.1
 189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=30&scrV=2#vi.vi.I-p51.1
 190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=30&scrV=14#v.XXII-p183.1
 191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=30&scrV=33#v.LV-p5.1
 192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=31&scrV=36#vi.v-p91.1
 193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=31&scrV=40#v.XXII-p380.1
 194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=31&scrV=41#vi.vi.I-p168.1
 195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=31&scrV=46#vi.vi.I-p143.1
 196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=2#vi.ix.III-p58.1
 197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=5#v.XXII-p315.1
 198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=7#v.CXXIII-p140.1
 199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=10#v.XXII-p315.1
 200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=10#v.CXXIII-p140.1
 201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p170.1
 202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=24#v.XXII-p100.1
 203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=25#vi.vi.I-p144.1
 204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=28#vi.vi.I-p144.1
 205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=30#v.LIV-p95.1
 206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=30#vi.ix.III-p60.1
 207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=31#vi.vi.I-p144.1
 208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=31#vi.ix.III-p59.1
 209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=33&scrV=0#v.LIII-p82.1
 210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=33&scrV=18#v.LVII-p83.1
 211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=34&scrV=0#v.XXII-p232.1
 212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=34&scrV=0#v.CVII-p37.1
 213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=34&scrV=30#v.LXXXIV-p53.1
 214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=4#vi.v-p38.1
 215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=16#v.LXVI-p19.1
 216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=16#vi.vi.I-p145.1
 217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=18#v.CVIII-p73.1
 218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=20#vi.vi.I-p145.1
 219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=21#v.CVIII-p99.1
 220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=23#v.XLVIII-p38.1
 221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=23#v.LIV-p71.1
 222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=25#v.LXXIX-p29.1
 223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=28#vi.vi.I-p169.1
 224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=35#v.XXXIX-p46.1
 225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=35#vi.ix.I_1-p254.1
 226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=36#v.LXXIX-p44.1
 227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p147.1
 228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p148.1
 229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=12#v.CXXIII-p83.1
 230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=26#vi.v-p49.1
 231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=26#vi.ix.I_1-p145.1
 232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=27#v.CXXIII-p105.1
 233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=38&scrV=28#v.LII-p32.1
 234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=12#v.LXXI-p39.1
 235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=12#v.LXXIX-p43.1
 236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=12#v.CXVIII-p35.1
 237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=12#v.CXLV-p8.1
 238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=12#v.XLVIII-p28.1
 239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=23#vi.ix.III-p61.1
 240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=41&scrV=42#v.LXXIX-p18.1
 241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=41&scrV=45#v.LXXIX-p31.1
 242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=41&scrV=50#v.LXXIX-p19.1
 243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=43&scrV=16#v.CVIII-p123.1
 244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=46&scrV=0#v.LIII-p76.1
 245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=46&scrV=3#vi.ix.III-p62.1
 246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=46&scrV=26#iv.V-p16.1
 247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=46&scrV=26#v.XXII-p99.1
 248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=10#v.LXVIII-p8.1
 249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=10#v.CVIII-p89.1
 250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=10#v.LXVIII-p9.1
 251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=11#vi.viii-p138.1
 252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=17#vi.vi.I-p181.1
 253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=27#v.XXXVIII-p8.1
 254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=27#v.LX-p55.1
 255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=27#v.LXIX-p82.1
 256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=49&scrV=31#v.XLVI-p99.1
 257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.XXXII-p6.1
 258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.LXIX-p72.1
 259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.LXXV-p4.1
 260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.LXXVI-p14.1
 261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.XXII-p167.1
 262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p150.1
 263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p162.1
 264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.XLVIII-p112.1
 265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.XV-p35.1
 266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.XXV-p2.1
 267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi.viii-p132.1
 268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=20#vi.vi.I-p427.1
 269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=4&scrV=24#vi.vi.I-p149.1
 270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.CXLVII-p10.1
 271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=13#v.LXXXV-p2.1
 272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=16#v.XXII-p217.1
 273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vi.ix.III-p63.1
 274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vi.ix.III-p63.1
 275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=8#v.XXXI-p5.1
 276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=8#v.CXXVIII-p12.1
 277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.XXII-p101.1
 278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.CXXX-p190.1
 279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=21#v.CVIII-p102.1
 280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=22#v.XV-p21.1
 281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=23#v.CXXX-p103.1
 282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=29#v.CXXX-p103.1
 283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=29#vi.v-p60.1
 284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=29#v.LXIX-p8.1
 285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=38#v.LXIX-p8.1
 286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=46#v.XXII-p361.1
 287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.CVII-p17.1
 288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p7.3
 289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=18#v.XXXV-p5.2
 290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=18#v.XXXVI-p4.1
 291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=19#vi.vi.I-p159.3
 292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=1#vi.ii-p15.1
 293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=20#v.XXII-p393.1
 294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=21#v.LIV-p85.1
 295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=23#v.CXXV-p66.1
 296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=23#v.XXII-p84.1
 297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=23#v.LXIX-p65.1
 298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=15&scrV=27#v.CXXV-p66.1
 299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p158.1
 300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=4#v.LXXXII-p23.1
 301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=8#vi.vi.II-p165.1
 302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=8#v.XCI-p5.1
 303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=11#v.LX-p130.1
 304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=18&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p427.1
 305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=19&scrV=15#v.XLVIII-p138.1
 306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=5#v.XXXIX-p18.1
 307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=5#v.CXLVII-p28.1
 308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=12#v.LIV-p14.1
 309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=12#v.CXXIII-p34.1
 310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=2#vi.vi.II-p267.1
 311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=10#v.LXIX-p36.1
 312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=12#vi.ix.I_1-p255.1
 313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=22&scrV=28#vi.viii-p54.1
 314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=20#vi.vi.I-p159.3
 315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=26#vi.v-p111.1
 316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=11#v.XXII-p213.1
 317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=25&scrV=22#v.XXII-p215.1
 318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=27&scrV=20#v.CXXVIII-p11.1
 319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=28&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p324.1
 320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=2#v.LX-p78.1
 321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=4#v.LXXIX-p110.1
 322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=6#v.XXII-p78.1
 323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=10#v.CXXVIII-p35.1
 324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=30#vi.vii-p27.1
 325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=30#v.LXXVII-p20.1
 326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=31#v.LXXXII-p24.1
 327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=32#v.CXXVIII-p38.1
 328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=3#v.LIV-p70.1
 329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=20#vi.ix.III-p99.1
 330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=21#v.CXXIII-p144.1
 331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=29#v.LI-p83.1
 332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=33#vi.vi.I-p252.1
 333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=35#vi.vi.I-p252.1
 334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=37&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p157.1
 335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=38&scrV=8#vi.vi.I-p156.1
 336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.XXXI-p4.1
 337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.CXXVIII-p10.1
 338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.CXXV-p8.1
 339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vi.ix.I_1-p256.1
 340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=4&scrV=27#vi.ix.I_1-p256.1
 341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vi.ix.I_1-p257.1
 342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=9&scrV=1#vi.ix.I_1-p258.1
 343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vi.iv-p51.1
 344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=6#v.XXXIX-p65.1
 345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.LII-p96.1
 346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.LXIX-p109.1
 347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=9#vi.vi.II-p181.1
 348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=10&scrV=12#v.XXXIX-p65.1
 349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vi.v-p51.1
 350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=12&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p259.1
 351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=12&scrV=7#vi.ix.I_1-p260.1
 352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi.ix.I_1-p260.1
 353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p260.1
 354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=15&scrV=31#vi.ix.I_1-p261.1
 355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=2#vi.vi.II-p323.1
 356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=2#vi.ix.I_1-p261.1
 357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=5#vi.ix.I_1-p261.1
 358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p260.1
 359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=29#vi.vi.II-p210.1
 360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=18&scrV=9#vi.v-p99.1
 361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=2#v.CXVIII-p46.1
 362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=15#v.LXXIX-p5.1
 363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=21&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p154.1
 364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=21&scrV=7#v.LXIX-p37.1
 365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=21&scrV=10#v.XXXIX-p66.1
 366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=21&scrV=12#v.XXXIX-p68.1
 367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=21&scrV=13#v.LXIX-p37.1
 368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=21&scrV=13#vi.vi.I-p152.1
 369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=21&scrV=14#v.LII-p82.1
 370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=21&scrV=17#vi.iv-p62.1
 371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=21&scrV=17#v.LII-p83.1
 372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=22&scrV=12#v.CXXIII-p43.1
 373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=22&scrV=13#vi.vi.I-p153.1
 374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=22&scrV=14#vi.ix.I_1-p262.1
 375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=27#v.CXXX-p119.1
 376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=29#v.CXXX-p119.1
 377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=40#v.LII-p86.1
 378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=8#v.CXXX-p126.1
 379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=25&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p268.1
 380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=3&scrV=39#vii.iii.iv-p5.1
 381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.LXXXII-p48.1
 382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p156.2
 383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=4&scrV=23#vi.vi.I-p156.2
 384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=4&scrV=30#vi.vi.I-p156.2
 385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=4&scrV=35#vi.vi.I-p156.2
 386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=4&scrV=39#vi.vi.I-p156.2
 387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=5&scrV=11#vi.ix.I_1-p265.1
 388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi.ix.I_1-p265.1
 389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi.ix.I_1-p263.1
 390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=7&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p325.1
 391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.LII-p78.1
 392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=7&scrV=28#vi.ix.I_1-p264.1
 393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=4#v.CXXVIII-p7.1
 394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p159.1
 395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=16#v.LVIII-p8.1
 396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=16#v.LX-p67.1
 397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=20#v.LIV-p21.1
 398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=20#v.CXXVIII-p7.1
 399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=31#v.CXXVIII-p7.1
 400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=31#v.LIV-p21.1
 401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=34#vi.vi.II-p211.1
 402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.XXII-p15.1
 403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.LXXXII-p22.1
 404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=14#v.LXXVII-p37.1
 405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=13&scrV=23#v.CVIII-p108.1
 406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=7#vi.ix.I_1-p264.1
 407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=14&scrV=18#v.CXXX-p100.1
 408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=16&scrV=26#vi.iv-p55.1
 409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=16&scrV=46#v.CXXVIII-p34.1
 410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vi.v-p57.1
 411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=16#vi.v-p58.1
 412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=20#vi.vi.II-p322.1
 413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=20#v.CXVIII-p33.1
 414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=18&scrV=24#v.LII-p45.1
 415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=19&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p126.1
 416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=10#vi.ix.II-p189.1
 417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=12#vi.ix.II-p189.1
 418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p67.1
 419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=17#v.XLVIII-p67.1
 420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=17#v.CXXV-p146.1
 421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=29#v.XXXIX-p49.1
 422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=29#v.XXXIX-p55.1
 423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=21&scrV=9#v.III-p30.1
 424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=21#v.LXXVII-p66.1
 425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=23&scrV=21#v.CXXX-p75.1
 426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=24&scrV=15#v.LXXVII-p51.1
 427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=25&scrV=6#v.CXLVII-p64.1
 428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=25&scrV=7#v.CIX-p21.1
 429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=28&scrV=15#vi.ix.I_1-p265.1
 430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=28&scrV=22#vi.ix.I_1-p265.1
 431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=29&scrV=5#vi.ix.I_1-p265.1
 432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=33&scrV=0#v.LXXVII-p52.1
 433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=33&scrV=47#v.LXXVI-p24.1
 434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=34&scrV=15#vi.vi.II-p321.1
 435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p240.1
 436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=13#vi.ix.I_1-p266.1
 437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=35&scrV=30#vi.viii-p181.1
 438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.ix.I_1-p268.1
 439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=31#v.CXXII-p108.1
 440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=13#v.LVII-p91.1
 441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v.CXXX-p114.1
 442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p162.1
 443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.VII-p12.1
 444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.LXIX-p63.1
 445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p267.1
 446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=10#v.XLVI-p14.1
 447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=11#v.XLVI-p17.1
 448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=11&scrV=14#v.XLVI-p16.1
 449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p205.1
 450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v.CIX-p27.1
 451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=6#v.CIX-p26.1
 452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=15&scrV=12#vi.v-p82.1
 453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=15&scrV=21#v.CVII-p42.1
 454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=16&scrV=5#v.LII-p85.1
 455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=5#v.XIV-p69.1
 456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=6#vi.viii-p181.1
 457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=9#v.LXIX-p112.1
 458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=12#v.XIV-p69.1
 459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=17&scrV=15#vi.v-p83.1
 460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=2#vi.vii-p53.1
 461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=9#vi.ix.I_1-p268.1
 462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=13#vi.ix.I_1-p105.1
 463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=13#vi.ix.I_1-p267.1
 464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=20&scrV=6#vi.vi.I-p155.1
 465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=20&scrV=7#vi.v-p22.1
 466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=21&scrV=10#v.LXX-p13.1
 467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=21&scrV=11#v.LXVI-p61.1
 468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=21&scrV=17#vi.vi.II-p287.1
 469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=1#vi.v-p84.1
 470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=4#vi.ix.I_1-p224.1
 471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=8#vi.ix.I_1-p269.1
 472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=10#v.CXXIII-p28.1
 473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=23#vi.v-p21.1
 474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=23#v.LV-p24.1
 475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=22&scrV=24#vi.v-p20.1
 476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=2#vi.ix.I_1-p270.1
 477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=23&scrV=3#v.XXII-p80.1
 478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=24&scrV=1#v.LV-p27.1
 479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=27&scrV=9#v.CVIII-p305.1
 480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=27&scrV=9#v.CXXV-p103.1
 481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=29&scrV=23#v.XLVI-p61.1
 482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=7#v.LIII-p28.1
 483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=15#vi.vi.II-p161.1
 484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=33&scrV=9#vi.viii-p39.1
 485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=5#vi.v-p39.1
 486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=6#v.CIX-p9.1
 487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=6#vi.vi.I-p176.1
 488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=6#v.XXXIX-p55.1
 489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=8#v.XXXIX-p48.1
 490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=8#v.LX-p40.1
 491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.LII-p33.1
 492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=3&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p160.1
 493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.CVIII-p144.1
 494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p140.1
 495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=4&scrV=20#v.CVIII-p140.1
 496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.LXXVI-p25.1
 497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p138.1
 498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.LXXVI-p25.1
 499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.XXII-p167.1
 500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=5&scrV=15#vi.vi.I-p162.1
 501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v.LXXVI-p26.1
 502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.CXXXIII-p118.1
 503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=12#vi.ix.I_1-p271.1
 504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.CVIII-p146.1
 505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v.LXXVI-p28.1
 506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=9&scrV=0#v.CVIII-p59.1
 507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=9&scrV=27#vi.vi.II-p315.1
 508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.LXXVI-p27.1
 509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p163.1
 510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=10&scrV=12#v.CVIII-p58.1
 511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=10&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p166.1
 512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vi.vi.I-p164.1
 513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=10&scrV=26#v.LXXVI-p27.1
 514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=11&scrV=10#v.LXXVI-p28.1
 515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=11&scrV=19#vi.ix.I_1-p272.1
 516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=14&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p321.1
 517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=14&scrV=15#v.CVIII-p112.1
 518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=15&scrV=13#v.LXVI-p88.1
 519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=15&scrV=14#v.LXVI-p89.1
 520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=19&scrV=50#vi.vi.I-p172.1
 521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=22&scrV=27#v.LV-p6.1
 522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=28#vi.vi.I-p175.1
 523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=29#vi.vi.I-p171.1
 524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=30#v.CVIII-p150.1
 525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=30#v.XXXIX-p57.1
 526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=30#v.LX-p41.1
 527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=24&scrV=33#v.CVIII-p151.1
 528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.CVIII-p114.1
 529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p172.2
 530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.CVIII-p162.1
 531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=2#vi.v-p79.1
 532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=36#v.LVIII-p31.1
 533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=37#v.CVIII-p101.1
 534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v.LX-p53.1
 535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=11&scrV=30#vi.vi.I-p182.1
 536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=11&scrV=34#v.CXVIII-p45.1
 537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=15&scrV=17#v.CVIII-p165.1
 538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=17&scrV=5#v.XXIX-p2.2
 539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=19&scrV=0#v.CVIII-p60.1
 540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=20&scrV=0#v.CVIII-p60.1
 541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=20&scrV=47#v.CVIII-p60.2
 542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.CVIII-p153.1
 543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.XXXIX-p72.1
 544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.LXXI-p26.1
 545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ruth&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.CVIII-p331.1
 546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p152.1
 547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vi.vi.II-p174.1
 548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi.vi.II-p174.1
 549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=27#v.CXXV-p50.1
 550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p303.1
 551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.LXIX-p124.1
 552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.CXLVII-p71.1
 553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.VII-p40.1
 554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.XXIX-p2.1
 555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.CVII-p83.1
 556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=22#v.LXIX-p124.1
 557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=22#v.CXLVII-p71.1
 558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.vi.I-p156.2
 559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.vi.I-p187.1
 560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=24#vi.ix.I_1-p180.1
 561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=25#vi.viii-p170.1
 562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=27#v.CVII-p32.1
 563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=2&scrV=30#v.LXVI-p43.1
 564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.CXXXIII-p119.1
 565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p303.1
 566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.CXLVII-p72.1
 567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.LXVI-p23.1
 568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vi.vi.II-p170.1
 569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p428.1
 570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v.CXLVII-p70.1
 571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=9&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p428.1
 572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.LIII-p43.1
 573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.XLV-p8.1
 574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.LXIX-p121.1
 575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=14&scrV=24#vi.vi.II-p167.1
 576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=14&scrV=24#vi.vi.II-p168.1
 577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=14&scrV=27#vi.ix.I_1-p273.1
 578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=11#v.CXLVII-p4.1
 579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=11#v.CXLVII-p33.1
 580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=17#v.CXLVII-p4.1
 581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=15&scrV=35#v.CXXII-p13.1
 582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p274.1
 583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=7#v.XXII-p349.1
 584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=7#v.CXXV-p130.1
 585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=7#v.CXXXIII-p28.1
 586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p256.1
 587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=11#v.XIV-p82.1
 588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=49#v.XLVI-p19.1
 589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=50#v.LXX-p12.1
 590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=18&scrV=6#v.XLVI-p20.1
 591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v.LVII-p68.1
 592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=4#vi.vi.I-p151.1
 593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=4#v.XLVIII-p137.1
 594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=10#v.CVIII-p196.1
 595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=16#v.LVII-p69.1
 596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=22&scrV=17#v.CVIII-p53.1
 597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=25&scrV=38#v.CXXV-p67.1
 598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=28&scrV=13#v.XCVII-p13.1
 599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=30&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p259.1
 600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vi.ix.I_1-p275.1
 601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p66.1
 602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.CVIII-p66.1
 603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.XXII-p208.1
 604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.CXLVII-p73.1
 605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vi.ix.I_1-p276.1
 606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=8&scrV=13#vi.ix.II-p166.1
 607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=0#v.XXII-p107.1
 608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=11&scrV=4#v.LXXXV-p15.1
 609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v.CXXII-p61.1
 610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p180.1
 611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=16#v.LXXVII-p21.1
 612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.XXII-p112.1
 613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=13&scrV=14#v.CXLVII-p65.1
 614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=16&scrV=10#vi.ix.II-p167.1
 615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=1#v.XXXIX-p52.1
 616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=17&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p168.1
 617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=18&scrV=33#v.XXXIX-p47.1
 618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p316.1
 619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=0#v.CXXXIII-p120.1
 620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=24&scrV=10#vi.ix.I_1-p277.1
 621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.LII-p14.1
 622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.LII-p18.1
 623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=38#v.LXIX-p68.1
 624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.XLVI-p97.1
 625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.LXXIX-p74.1
 626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.LXXIV-p2.1
 627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=33#v.XXII-p110.1
 628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.LX-p79.1
 629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=9#v.XXII-p214.1
 630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=46#vi.ix.I_1-p278.1
 631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=8&scrV=46#v.CXXXIII-p24.1
 632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v.XXII-p111.1
 633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p194.1
 634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=11&scrV=14#v.CVIII-p193.1
 635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v.LXXXII-p20.1
 636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=24#vi.vi.II-p212.1
 637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=5#vi.ix.I_1-p279.1
 638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=14&scrV=8#vi.ix.II-p169.1
 639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=15&scrV=11#vi.ix.II-p171.1
 640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=16&scrV=34#v.CVIII-p137.1
 641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.LIV-p97.1
 642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=4#v.XXII-p310.1
 643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=6#v.XXII-p310.1
 644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=8#v.CXXV-p149.1
 645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=9#v.XXII-p311.1
 646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=3#v.XLVI-p102.1
 647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=4#v.CVIII-p158.1
 648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=21#vi.viii-p16.1
 649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=40#v.CIX-p22.1
 650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=4#vi.ix.II-p172.1
 651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=4#v.XXII-p82.1
 652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=8#vi.vi.II-p169.1
 653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=11#v.CXXIII-p144.1
 654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=21#v.LXXI-p42.1
 655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=10#v.CXVIII-p22.1
 656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=13#v.CXLVII-p66.1
 657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.LXXVII-p24.1
 658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.CXXII-p70.1
 659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=21#v.LXXVII-p24.1
 660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=23#v.CXXII-p70.1
 661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=25#v.LXXVII-p23.1
 662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=27#v.LXXVII-p25.1
 663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=27#v.CXXII-p71.1
 664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=27#vi.vi.II-p173.1
 665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=28#v.LXXVII-p26.1
 666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=21&scrV=29#v.CXLVII-p67.1
 667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=19#v.CXXXIII-p144.1
 668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.CXXX-p19.1
 669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.XXII-p29.1
 670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.LI-p84.1
 671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.LXXI-p41.1
 672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.CXVIII-p36.1
 673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.XXII-p147.1
 674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.LXXI-p41.1
 675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.CXVIII-p36.1
 676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=19#v.CVIII-p142.1
 677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=27#vi.ix.I_1-p280.1
 678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=38#v.CXXV-p37.1
 679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=38#v.XXII-p83.1
 680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=1#v.LVIII-p55.1
 681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=1#v.CXXV-p37.1
 682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.CXXV-p65.1
 683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.XXII-p28.1
 684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.XXII-p29.1
 685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v.XXII-p85.1
 686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=10&scrV=15#v.LVIII-p59.1
 687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=21#v.XLVI-p101.1
 688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p171.1
 689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=3#vi.ix.II-p177.1
 690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p177.1
 691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p178.1
 692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=28#v.VII-p23.1
 693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=35#v.LX-p128.1
 694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=0#v.XXXVIII-p6.1
 695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p180.1
 696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p180.1
 697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=12#v.XXII-p209.1
 698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=13#vi.ix.II-p181.1
 699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vi.ix.II-p181.1
 700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=20&scrV=18#vi.vi.I-p199.1
 701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=22&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p198.1
 702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=23&scrV=29#v.LXVIII-p10.1
 703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=23&scrV=29#v.CVIII-p47.1
 704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=23&scrV=29#vi.vi.II-p65.1
 705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=32#vi.ix.I_1-p281.1
 706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=2&scrV=55#v.LII-p34.1
 707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=6&scrV=34#vi.vi.I-p185.1
 708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=11&scrV=5#v.LVIII-p86.1
 709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=21#vi.iv-p172.2
 710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=15#v.XLVI-p21.1
 711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=21&scrV=18#v.XLVI-p21.1
 712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=22&scrV=8#vi.vi.I-p189.1
 713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=23&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p427.1
 714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Chr&scrCh=28&scrV=3#v.LII-p20.1
 715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.XLVI-p21.1
 716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=6&scrV=36#vi.ix.I_1-p92.1
 717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=8&scrV=5#v.CVIII-p57.1
 718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=15&scrV=2#vi.ix.III-p12.1
 719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=17&scrV=3#vi.ix.II-p174.1
 720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=19&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p175.1
 721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=20&scrV=5#v.LX-p129.1
 722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=20&scrV=26#v.CVIII-p115.1
 723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=22&scrV=9#vi.ix.II-p176.1
 724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=32&scrV=26#vi.ix.II-p182.1
 725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=32&scrV=30#v.LXIX-p68.1
 726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=33&scrV=12#v.LXXVII-p27.1
 727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=33&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p64.1
 728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=34&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p183.1
 729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=34&scrV=22#vi.ix.II-p184.1
 730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=35&scrV=20#vi.vi.II-p65.1
 731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=35&scrV=20#v.CXXXIII-p145.1
 732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=35&scrV=22#vi.ix.II-p185.1
 733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Neh&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.XXXIV-p4.2
 734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.CXXV-p90.1
 735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi.ix.III-p77.1
 736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=7&scrV=10#v.XXII-p193.1
 737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=9&scrV=20#v.LIII-p138.1
 738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=14&scrV=11#v.XLVIII-p113.1
 739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Esth&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v.CXXX-p25.1
 740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.ix.I_1-p82.1
 741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.CXXX-p48.1
 742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.CXVIII-p13.1
 743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.XXII-p299.1
 744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.XXXIX-p23.1
 745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.CVIII-p227.1
 746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.CXXIII-p68.1
 747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.CXXVII-p91.1
 748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.XXII-p95.1
 749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.CXVIII-p19.1
 750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.LXVI-p95.1
 751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.CVIII-p188.1
 752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.CXVIII-p20.1
 753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.CXVIII-p23.1
 754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.XXXIX-p11.1
 755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vii.iii.viii-p6.1
 756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vi.ix.II-p9.1
 757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.CXXII-p97.1
 758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vi.ix.II-p210.1
 759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi.vi.II-p68.1
 760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p10.1
 761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=1#v.CXXX-p49.1
 762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p69.1
 763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=20#vi.ix.II-p11.1
 764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=9#vi.vi.II-p250.1
 765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=15#vi.ix.II-p12.1
 766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=20#vi.vi.II-p27.1
 767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=20#vi.ix.I_1-p88.1
 768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=29#vi.ix.II-p13.1
 769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=30#vi.vi.II-p27.1
 770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=30#vi.ix.I_1-p88.1
 771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=31#vi.ix.I_1-p88.1
 772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=10&scrV=15#vi.ix.II-p14.1
 773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vi.ix.I_1-p233.1
 774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vi.ix.II-p15.1
 775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.CXXII-p95.1
 776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p24.1
 777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=5#v.CXLIV-p31.1
 778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=16&scrV=21#vi.ix.I_1-p86.1
 779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=18&scrV=14#v.XLVIII-p114.1
 780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=23#vi.viii-p115.1
 781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=19&scrV=25#v.LIII-p85.1
 782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=25&scrV=5#v.CXXII-p96.1
 783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=25&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p209.1
 784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=25&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p46.1
 785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=25&scrV=5#v.CXXV-p42.1
 786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=31&scrV=35#vi.ix.I_1-p87.1
 787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=38&scrV=3#v.XXII-p102.1
 788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=38&scrV=32#vi.vi.II-p250.1
 789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=4#vi.ix.II-p17.1
 790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=8#v.CVIII-p200.1
 791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=16#v.VII-p20.1
 792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=16#v.XXII-p96.1
 793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=16#v.CXXX-p120.1
 794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=16#vi.vi.II-p72.1
 795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=40&scrV=21#vi.vi.II-p72.1
 796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p74.1
 797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=27#vi.vi.II-p76.1
 798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=41&scrV=34#vi.vi.II-p73.1
 799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=42&scrV=6#v.CXXXIII-p143.1
 800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=42&scrV=6#vii.iii.viii-p7.1
 801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.LIV-p76.1
 802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.V-p12.1
 803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.LIII-p30.1
 804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.LII-p24.1
 805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.XXX-p3.1
 806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.CXXVII-p18.1
 807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.CXXXIII-p31.1
 808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi.vii-p52.1
 809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.ix.I_1-p215.1
 810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.XLV-p6.1
 811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi.iv-p120.1
 812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.CIX-p12.1
 813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.XIII-p5.1
 814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.LXXIX-p100.1
 815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p147.1
 816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.CXXII-p81.1
 817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi.ix.III-p65.1
 818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=12#vi.ix.III-p9.1
 819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vi.iv-p172.2
 820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.XXII-p287.1
 821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.CXXII-p53.1
 822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vi.v-p19.1
 823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.XXII-p142.1
 824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p174.1
 825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.CXXII-p31.1
 826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=9#v.I-p10.1
 827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vi.viii-p42.1
 828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p79.1
 829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi.iv-p123.1
 830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=0#iv.III-p23.1
 831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=8#v.XIV-p31.1
 832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p163.1
 833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vi.iv-p172.2
 834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p85.1
 835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.iv-p117.1
 836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.X-p19.1
 837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#v.LX-p13.1
 838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p86.1
 839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=3#vi.ix.II-p86.1
 840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p339.1
 841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=2#v.LXXXIV-p24.1
 842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=4#vi.ix.III-p15.1
 843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=5#v.LII-p43.1
 844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=5#v.CXVIII-p32.1
 845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=5#v.LII-p44.1
 846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=7#v.CXXXIII-p58.1
 847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vi.viii-p110.1
 848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=4#v.CXXXIII-p99.1
 849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vi.iv-p121.1
 850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=37#v.CXXII-p26.1
 851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=45#vi.viii-p17.1
 852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=4#v.LVIII-p35.1
 853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=6#vi.iv-p122.1
 854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=9#v.CXXX-p167.1
 855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=12#vi.ix.I_1-p93.1
 856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=12#vi.ix.I_1-p236.1
 857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=12#v.CXXX-p97.1
 858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=13#v.CXXV-p71.1
 859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=13#v.CXXX-p99.1
 860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=20&scrV=7#vi.ii-p16.1
 861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vi.ix.III-p127.1
 862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=1#v.LVII-p84.1
 863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=2#vi.ix.III-p122.1
 864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=22#vi.v-p94.1
 865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=29#v.CVIII-p97.1
 866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=5#v.XLIV-p7.1
 867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=1#v.XVII-p22.1
 868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=1#v.LVIII-p30.1
 869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=1#v.LXXXII-p58.1
 870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=7#v.LXXVI-p4.1
 871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=15#v.CXXXIII-p94.1
 872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p62.1
 873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p144.1
 874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=8#v.CVIII-p313.1
 875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=8#v.CXXX-p191.1
 876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p192.1
 877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=13#v.XXII-p7.1
 878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=13#v.CVIII-p319.1
 879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=29&scrV=3#v.LXIX-p87.1
 880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=29&scrV=10#v.LXIX-p87.1
 881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=5#v.LX-p38.1
 882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p147.1
 883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=7#v.CXXII-p25.1
 884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=9#vi.iv-p118.1
 885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=11#v.CVIII-p269.1
 886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#v.CXXXIII-p123.1
 887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=1#v.LXIX-p94.1
 888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=4#v.CVIII-p16.1
 889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=4#vi.ix.II-p207.1
 890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p4.1
 891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p148.1
 892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=5#v.CXXII-p54.1
 893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=9#vi.vii-p13.1
 894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=9#vi.vii-p14.1
 895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=10#vi.ix.I_1-p213.1
 896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=6#vi.viii-p61.1
 897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=15#vi.viii-p79.1
 898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=2#v.XXII-p258.1
 899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=8#v.LXXI-p73.1
 900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=8#v.CVIII-p273.1
 901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=8#v.CXXXIII-p84.1
 902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=14#v.CXXV-p91.1
 903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=13#v.CVIII-p14.1
 904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=13#v.CXXX-p113.1
 905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=6#v.XXXIX-p21.1
 906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p298.1
 907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=7#v.XLVIII-p118.1
 908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=27#vi.vi.I-p117.1
 909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p149.1
 910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=25#v.XXII-p309.1
 911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=28#vii.iii.iv-p6.2
 912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=39#vi.ix.II-p150.1
 913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=39#vii.iii.iv-p6.5
 914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=2#v.XXII-p381.1
 915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=5#v.CXXII-p67.1
 916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=5#vi.ix.III-p114.1
 917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p151.1
 918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=7#vi.ix.III-p113.1
 919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=8#vi.ix.II-p153.1
 920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=13#v.CVIII-p203.1
 921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=13#v.XVII-p5.1
 922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=14#v.CVIII-p204.1
 923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=1#v.XVII-p4.1
 924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p202.1
 925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=2#vii.iii.iv-p17.1
 926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=3#vii.iv.x-p7.1
 927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=4#v.CXLIV-p29.1
 928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p154.1
 929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=6#v.XXII-p138.1
 930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=6#v.LI-p74.1
 931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=12#v.LXXI-p32.1
 932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=12#v.CVIII-p10.1
 933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=2#v.CXXII-p109.1
 934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=2#v.CXXX-p83.1
 935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=0#v.LIV-p76.1
 936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p15.1
 937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=7#vi.ix.I_1-p108.1
 938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=9#vi.vii-p58.1
 939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p276.1
 940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=1#v.CXXII-p32.1
 941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p271.1
 942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p161.1
 943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=11#v.XXII-p67.1
 944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=11#v.CVIII-p223.1
 945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=8#v.XXII-p258.1
 946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=17#v.CVIII-p244.1
 947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=21#v.CVIII-p243.1
 948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=21#v.CXXXIII-p29.1
 949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=22#v.CVIII-p245.1
 950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=22#v.CXXVII-p40.1
 951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=23#v.CVIII-p310.1
 952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=23#v.CIX-p38.1
 953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=0#v.XLVIII-p39.1
 954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=0#vi.viii-p140.1
 955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=1#v.LXXI-p74.1
 956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p274.1
 957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=3#v.CXXIII-p98.1
 958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=9#v.CXXX-p9.1
 959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p75.1
 960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=10#v.XXII-p61.1
 961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=10#v.XLVIII-p40.1
 962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=10#v.LIV-p17.1
 963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=10#v.XXII-p4.1
 964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=10#v.LIV-p15.1
 965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=13#v.CVII-p47.1
 966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=13#v.CXXX-p9.1
 967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=13#v.CXXX-p12.1
 968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=13#vi.vi.I-p75.1
 969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=13#vi.viii-p96.1
 970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=14#v.CXXX-p9.1
 971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p75.1
 972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=16#vi.vi.I-p268.1
 973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=4#v.LVIII-p23.1
 974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=47&scrV=7#v.CXXV-p102.1
 975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=2#vi.vi.I-p173.1
 976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=8#v.XXIII-p23.1
 977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=8#v.LX-p44.1
 978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=8#v.CVIII-p266.1
 979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=7#v.LIV-p113.1
 980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=16#v.CXXXIII-p126.1
 981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=18#v.CIX-p14.1
 982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=20#v.L-p7.1
 983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=20#v.XXII-p342.1
 984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=20#v.CXXV-p124.1
 985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=20#v.LII-p112.1
 986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p145.1
 987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=1#v.CXXII-p62.1
 988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p63.1
 989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=2#v.CXXII-p63.1
 990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=4#v.XXII-p108.1
 991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=4#v.LXXVII-p22.1
 992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p305.1
 993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=5#v.CXXXIII-p26.1
 994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=5#v.CXLVII-p60.1
 995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p26.1
 996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=5#vi.ix.I_1-p234.1
 997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=7#v.IV-p9.1
 998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=7#v.CXLVII-p60.1
 999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=12#v.LXXVII-p22.1
1000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p17.1
1001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=13#v.CXXII-p65.1
1002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=17#v.LXXVII-p32.1
1003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=53&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p339.1
1004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=53&scrV=5#v.XXII-p262.1
1005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=6#v.XXII-p331.1
1006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=6#v.LXXI-p5.1
1007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=6#v.LXXIX-p26.1
1008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p18.1
1009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=6#v.CXXII-p106.1
1010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=7#v.LXXI-p17.1
1011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=13#v.LVIII-p12.1
1012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=21#v.CXXV-p126.1
1013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=4#v.XXII-p66.1
1014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=4#v.CXXV-p125.1
1015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p178.1
1016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=6#vi.iv-p26.1
1017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=7#v.CXXX-p104.1
1018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=58&scrV=3#vi.ix.II-p7.1
1019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=58&scrV=4#v.CXXXIX-p10.1
1020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=1#v.LV-p31.1
1021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=2#vi.ix.I_1-p149.1
1022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p257.1
1023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=1#v.LXXI-p16.1
1024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=1#v.LXXV-p9.1
1025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=1#v.CXXII-p33.1
1026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=8#v.CXXIII-p96.1
1027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=63&scrV=8#v.CXXX-p73.1
1028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=13#v.LXVI-p76.1
1029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=14#v.LXVI-p78.1
1030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=27#v.XXXVIII-p9.1
1031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=30#v.CVIII-p281.1
1032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=4#v.XXVII-p11.1
1033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p28.1
1034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p155.1
1035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=5#v.CVIII-p235.1
1036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=10#v.CXXX-p111.1
1037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=11#v.XXVII-p12.1
1038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=12#v.CXVII-p8.1
1039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=71&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p236.1
1040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=72&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p53.1
1041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=72&scrV=15#vi.vi.I-p54.1
1042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=72&scrV=20#v.XXIII-p5.1
1043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=0#v.XXIII-p4.1
1044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=0#v.XXIII-p6.1
1045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=2#vi.vi.I-p174.1
1046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=2#v.XXXIX-p14.1
1047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=3#v.CXLVII-p15.1
1048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=11#v.XXXIX-p14.1
1049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=11#v.CXLVII-p12.1
1050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=12#v.XXXIX-p14.1
1051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=13#v.LXVIII-p6.1
1052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=13#v.CXLVII-p13.1
1053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=13#v.XXXIX-p19.1
1054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=15#v.XXIII-p7.1
1055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=15#v.XXXIX-p15.1
1056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=15#v.LXVIII-p6.1
1057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=16#v.XXXIX-p20.1
1058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=16#vi.ix.I_1-p132.1
1059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=17#vi.vi.II-p256.1
1060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=20#v.XLIII-p10.1
1061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=22#v.CVIII-p237.1
1062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=22#vi.ix.I_1-p133.1
1063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=25#v.XLIII-p17.1
1064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=26#v.LII-p43.1
1065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=26#v.LXVI-p66.1
1066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=26#vi.vi.II-p283.1
1067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=28#v.XLIII-p15.1
1068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=13#v.LXIX-p62.1
1069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=19#v.CVIII-p280.1
1070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=75&scrV=5#v.LXXVI-p7.1
1071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=1#v.LVIII-p34.1
1072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=1#v.LX-p25.1
1073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=2#v.XLVI-p36.1
1074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=2#v.LXXV-p13.1
1075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=2#v.CXXV-p93.1
1076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=77&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p156.1
1077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=77&scrV=4#v.LXXIX-p99.1
1078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=77&scrV=4#v.CVIII-p229.1
1079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=77&scrV=10#vi.ix.II-p157.1
1080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=12#v.CVIII-p169.1
1081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=25#v.CVIII-p272.1
1082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=57#v.CXXV-p132.1
1083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=79&scrV=1#v.CXXVII-p80.1
1084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=79&scrV=1#v.CXXVII-p81.1
1085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=79&scrV=11#v.CVIII-p231.1
1086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p146.1
1087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=1#v.XXII-p46.1
1088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#v.XXII-p45.1
1089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=83&scrV=8#v.CXXIII-p152.1
1090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=83&scrV=9#v.XLVI-p109.1
1091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p314.1
1092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=6#v.XXII-p90.1
1093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=6#v.CXXX-p169.1
1094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=7#v.LXXI-p34.1
1095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=10#v.CVIII-p315.1
1096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=4#v.CXXII-p24.1
1097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=10#v.CXXII-p57.1
1098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=11#v.LVIII-p45.1
1099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=11#v.CXLVII-p37.1
1100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=87&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p68.1
1101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=87&scrV=1#v.XLVI-p38.1
1102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=87&scrV=5#v.LIV-p114.1
1103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=88&scrV=21#vi.ix.III-p26.1
1104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p160.1
1105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=48#vi.ix.III-p86.1
1106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=10#v.X-p7.1
1107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=10#v.CXVIII-p49.1
1108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=5#v.XXII-p27.1
1109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p161.1
1110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=91&scrV=10#v.LXVIII-p5.1
1111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=92&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p164.1
1112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=92&scrV=15#v.CXXX-p168.1
1113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=20#v.CXXXIII-p98.1
1114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=4#v.XXII-p373.1
1115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=6#v.LXXXIV-p41.1
1116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=6#v.CXXII-p66.1
1117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=97&scrV=8#v.XXII-p298.1
1118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=97&scrV=8#v.XXXIX-p26.1
1119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=99&scrV=6#vi.vi.I-p184.1
1120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=101&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p179.1
1121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=101&scrV=8#v.CIX-p15.1
1122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=5#v.XXII-p140.1
1123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=7#v.XXII-p143.1
1124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=9#v.XXII-p146.1
1125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=9#v.CVIII-p270.1
1126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=9#v.CXXX-p112.1
1127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=9#vi.vi.II-p178.1
1128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=2#v.XXII-p145.1
1129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=8#vi.ix.II-p165.1
1130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=10#vi.ix.II-p165.1
1131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=4#vi.viii-p62.1
1132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=18#v.CXXX-p84.1
1133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=18#v.CXXX-p92.1
1134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=20#v.XXII-p35.1
1135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=24#vi.ix.I_1-p166.1
1136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=26#v.LXXI-p15.1
1137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=29#v.CXXVII-p72.1
1138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=35#vi.ix.I_1-p211.1
1139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=37#v.XXII-p179.1
1140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=32#vi.vi.II-p67.1
1141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=24#v.XXII-p140.1
1142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=109&scrV=24#vi.vi.II-p179.1
1143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p85.1
1144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=111&scrV=10#v.CXXXIII-p85.1
1145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=9#v.LXXV-p31.1
1146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p248.1
1147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=4#v.XXXIV-p3.1
1148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=7#v.XXII-p160.1
1149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=7#v.LI-p37.1
1150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=7#vi.viii-p32.1
1151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=9#v.LI-p39.1
1152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=11#vi.ix.II-p77.2
1153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=11#vi.vi.II-p304.1
1154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=11#vi.ix.III-p117.1
1155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=12#v.XXII-p375.1
1156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=14#v.VII-p22.1
1157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=15#v.XXII-p375.1
1158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=15#v.CIX-p17.1
1159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=6#v.I-p28.1
1160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=6#v.XXII-p66.1
1161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p173.1
1162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p246.1
1163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=8#v.LII-p93.1
1164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=25#v.XX-p2.1
1165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p319.1
1166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=1#v.CXXVII-p10.1
1167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=1#vi.ix.III-p93.1
1168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=11#v.LXXXIV-p23.1
1169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=11#v.CXXVII-p17.1
1170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=18#v.LIII-p45.1
1171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=18#v.LII-p90.1
1172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=18#v.LVIII-p78.1
1173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=18#vi.ix.I_1-p122.1
1174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=20#v.LIII-p142.1
1175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=54#v.LIII-p29.1
1176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=62#v.CIX-p31.1
1177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=67#v.LI-p36.1
1178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=67#v.CXXX-p170.1
1179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=67#vi.viii-p31.1
1180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=83#v.XXII-p139.1
1181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=103#v.LIV-p102.1
1182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=104#v.CXXVII-p20.1
1183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=105#vi.vi.I-p261.1
1184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=105#vi.vii-p42.1
1185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=123#vi.v-p36.1
1186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=136#v.CXXII-p37.1
1187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=137#v.XXXIX-p24.1
1188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=140#v.XXII-p134.1
1189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=176#v.CXXII-p119.1
1190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p319.2
1191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=0#v.VII-p14.1
1192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=0#v.LIII-p96.1
1193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=3#vi.ix.III-p120.1
1194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=5#v.XXII-p382.1
1195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p329.1
1196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=5#v.XXXIX-p35.1
1197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=120&scrV=5#v.CVIII-p6.1
1198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=1#v.VII-p15.1
1199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=4#v.LXXV-p37.1
1200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=4#v.CIX-p36.1
1201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=6#v.LII-p105.1
1202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=123&scrV=2#vi.v-p35.1
1203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=124&scrV=7#v.XXII-p30.1
1204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=5#v.III-p29.1
1205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=5#v.LIII-p118.1
1206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=5#v.CXXII-p30.1
1207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=0#v.XXXIV-p2.1
1208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=1#vi.ix.I_1-p25.1
1209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=1#vi.ix.III-p7.1
1210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=2#v.XXXIV-p2.2
1211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=3#v.LXXIX-p61.1
1212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=4#v.XXXIV-p2.3
1213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=5#v.CXVIII-p50.1
1214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=128&scrV=2#v.XXXIV-p4.3
1215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=128&scrV=3#v.XXII-p178.1
1216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=128&scrV=3#v.CXXIII-p94.1
1217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=128&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p178.1
1218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=128&scrV=6#v.CXXIII-p94.1
1219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=131&scrV=1#v.XXII-p260.1
1220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=131&scrV=2#v.CVIII-p323.1
1221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=1#v.LXXVI-p9.1
1222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=1#v.LXXXII-p8.1
1223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=2#v.CVIII-p91.1
1224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p92.1
1225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p94.1
1226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=7#v.XLVI-p68.1
1227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=11#v.XXII-p98.1
1228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=14#v.CVIII-p95.1
1229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=17#v.CVIII-p96.1
1230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=133&scrV=1#vi.v-p93.1
1231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=134&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p320.1
1232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=1#v.XLVI-p12.1
1233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=3#v.VII-p24.1
1234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=4#v.XLV-p19.1
1235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=9#v.XXII-p68.1
1236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=137&scrV=9#v.CXXX-p98.1
1237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p131.1
1238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=11#v.XLVIII-p142.1
1239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=12#v.CVIII-p8.1
1240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=13#v.VII-p21.1
1241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=21#v.LI-p62.1
1242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=21#v.CIX-p16.1
1243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=21#vi.viii-p38.1
1244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=140&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p196.1
1245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=3#v.CXVII-p9.1
1246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=4#v.LI-p20.1
1247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=4#v.CXXV-p123.1
1248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=4#v.CXXV-p128.1
1249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=5#v.CXXV-p137.1
1250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p189.2
1251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=142&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p91.1
1252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=142&scrV=7#v.LI-p38.1
1253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=142&scrV=7#v.CXXX-p171.1
1254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=142&scrV=7#vi.viii-p33.1
1255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=2#v.CXXXIII-p27.1
1256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=2#vi.ix.I_1-p94.1
1257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=2#vi.ix.I_1-p125.1
1258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=2#vi.ix.III-p115.1
1259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=4#vi.ix.III-p116.1
1260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=146&scrV=4#v.CXXVII-p73.1
1261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=146&scrV=7#v.IV-p11.1
1262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=146&scrV=7#v.VII-p24.1
1263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=161&scrV=4#v.LV-p18.1
1264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.LXX-p7.1
1265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.ix.I_1-p121.1
1266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.LXXXII-p18.1
1267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vi.ix.III-p64.1
1268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.LXXI-p54.1
1269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vi.vi.I-p236.1
1270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.LII-p21.1
1271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=23#v.XXII-p241.1
1272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=23#v.LXXIX-p87.1
1273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=23#v.CXXV-p48.1
1274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=4&scrV=23#v.CXXX-p96.1
1275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.CXXVIII-p8.1
1276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.CXXVIII-p22.1
1277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=22#v.XLVIII-p191.1
1278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.CXXV-p80.1
1279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v.LI-p59.1
1280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=26#vi.vi.I-p230.1
1281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=27#v.XXII-p122.1
1282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=6&scrV=27#vi.vi.I-p64.1
1283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.CVIII-p247.1
1284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=3#v.XXII-p357.1
1285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=7&scrV=27#vi.vi.I-p231.1
1286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=18#vi.vi.I-p231.1
1287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.LII-p70.1
1288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.CXVII-p17.1
1289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=9#vi.viii-p18.1
1290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=19#vi.ix.III-p3.1
1291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.CXXV-p81.1
1292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p161.1
1293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.XXII-p290.1
1294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.LXXI-p53.1
1295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vi.ix.III-p111.1
1296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=1#v.LXIX-p45.1
1297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=12#v.XI-p17.1
1298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=12#vi.ix.I_1-p286.1
1299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=12#vi.iv-p177.1
1300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=28#v.CXXVIII-p39.1
1301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=29#v.CVIII-p216.1
1302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=15&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p24.1
1303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=3#vi.ix.III-p66.1
1304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p57.1
1305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.CXXXIII-p96.1
1306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=26#vi.ix.II-p16.1
1307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=26#vi.vi.II-p191.1
1308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=18&scrV=3#v.CXXII-p16.1
1309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=18&scrV=12#v.LXXVI-p10.1
1310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=18&scrV=17#vi.ix.II-p6.1
1311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=18&scrV=17#vi.ix.I_1-p100.1
1312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vi.ix.I_1-p287.1
1313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=19&scrV=25#v.LIV-p82.1
1314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p125.1
1315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=9#vi.ix.I_1-p288.1
1316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=9#vi.ix.II-p18.1
1317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=9#v.CXXV-p41.1
1318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=9#v.CXXXIII-p25.1
1319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=9#vi.vi.II-p25.1
1320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vi.ix.I_1-p289.1
1321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=24#vi.ix.I_1-p203.1
1322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=21&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p234.1
1323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=21&scrV=19#vi.vi.I-p232.1
1324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=24&scrV=16#vi.ix.II-p5.1
1325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=24&scrV=16#v.CXXII-p84.1
1326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=24&scrV=16#v.CXXII-p100.1
1327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=24&scrV=21#v.LII-p113.1
1328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=24&scrV=21#v.CXXV-p135.1
1329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=23#v.CXXV-p131.1
1330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=24#vi.vi.I-p234.1
1331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=15#vi.vi.I-p235.1
1332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=28&scrV=13#v.CXXII-p68.1
1333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=30&scrV=15#vi.vi.I-p237.1
1334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=31&scrV=10#v.LXIX-p44.1
1335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.XLVIII-p109.1
1336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.CXXXIII-p19.1
1337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.CXXIV-p44.1
1338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.XLVIII-p63.1
1339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.LXXVII-p50.1
1340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p239.1
1341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.CXXVI-p10.1
1342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.XXII-p156.1
1343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.CVII-p80.1
1344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.CXXIII-p91.1
1345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vi.i-p23.1
1346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.XLVIII-p63.1
1347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.XXXIX-p50.2
1348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.LXXVI-p11.1
1349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.LXXXII-p63.1
1350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p240.1
1351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=12#v.LXXIX-p21.1
1352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=16#v.XLVIII-p68.1
1353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=16#v.XLVIII-p6.1
1354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=16#vi.ix.I_1-p290.1
1355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=16#vi.vi.I-p119.1
1356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=16#vi.ix.I_1-p245.1
1357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=20#v.CXXXIII-p23.1
1358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=21#vi.ix.I_1-p91.1
1359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vi.ix.I_1-p248.1
1360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=28#vi.vi.I-p242.1
1361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=8&scrV=63#v.LII-p75.1
1362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=2#v.CVIII-p311.1
1363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vi.vii-p30.1
1364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.XXXIX-p6.1
1365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.LXXVII-p83.1
1366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.CXXII-p80.1
1367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.CXXX-p88.1
1368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=8#vi.vi.I-p243.1
1369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=8#vi.viii-p121.1
1370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=51#v.LII-p12.1
1371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=54#v.LII-p12.1
1372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=9&scrV=55#v.LII-p12.1
1373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.XLIV-p8.1
1374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v.XXII-p249.1
1375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p82.1
1376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p95.1
1377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=11#v.CXXV-p127.1
1378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=11&scrV=2#vi.iv-p171.1
1379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=11&scrV=19#vi.ix.II-p27.1
1380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.I-p30.1
1381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.XXXIX-p8.1
1382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.CXXVI-p2.1
1383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=35&scrV=0#iv.III-p48.3
1384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.XXII-p71.1
1385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.XXII-p16.1
1386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.LXXX-p5.1
1387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.CVII-p48.1
1388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p11.1
1389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.viii-p97.1
1390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.XXII-p13.1
1391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.XXII-p239.1
1392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.XXII-p128.1
1393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p122.1
1394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.LXVI-p75.1
1395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.CXXII-p12.1
1396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.CXXX-p72.1
1397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.XXII-p240.1
1398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p245.1
1399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.XXII-p238.1
1400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.XXII-p163.1
1401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.LXXV-p8.1
1402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.CXXX-p89.1
1403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p246.1
1404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.XCVII-p5.1
1405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.XLVI-p25.1
1406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.LXVI-p75.1
1407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.XXII-p165.1
1408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.LXVI-p63.1
1409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.XXII-p395.1
1410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.CVIII-p318.1
1411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p246.1
1412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi.vi.I-p248.1
1413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vi.vi.I-p249.1
1414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vi.vi.I-p251.1
1415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.XV-p5.1
1416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.CXXX-p86.1
1417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vi.vi.I-p254.1
1418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.XXII-p135.1
1419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.LXVI-p73.1
1420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.LXXI-p6.1
1421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.CXXX-p72.1
1422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.XXII-p235.1
1423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.XXII-p233.1
1424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.XXII-p223.1
1425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.XLVI-p110.1
1426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p255.1
1427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.LXIX-p88.1
1428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi.vi.I-p256.1
1429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.LIV-p16.1
1430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.ix.III-p104.1
1431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vi.vi.I-p258.1
1432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.LXXVI-p13.1
1433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p262.1
1434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p263.1
1435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.XLVIII-p187.1
1436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.XV-p6.1
1437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.XXII-p230.1
1438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vi.vi.I-p270.1
1439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p264.1
1440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.XXII-p60.1
1441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.XXII-p229.1
1442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.XXII-p237.1
1443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.LXVI-p74.1
1444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.LXVI-p75.1
1445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.LXXI-p20.1
1446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.LXXV-p39.1
1447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.CVII-p51.1
1448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.XXII-p247.1
1449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.CVII-p53.1
1450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.XXII-p229.1
1451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.XXII-p235.1
1452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.XXII-p248.1
1453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.XXII-p236.1
1454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.CVII-p49.1
1455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.XXII-p229.1
1456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=10#v.CVIII-p328.1
1457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p271.1
1458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vi.viii-p142.1
1459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vi.vi.I-p272.1
1460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=6&scrV=8#vi.vi.I-p193.1
1461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.CXXIII-p76.1
1462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.XXII-p224.1
1463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.XXII-p397.1
1464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.XXII-p396.1
1465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=7&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p273.1
1466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=5#v.XXII-p17.1
1467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p260.1
1468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vi.viii-p141.1
1469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=6#v.XXII-p403.1
1470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=7#v.XXII-p404.1
1471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=10#v.CVII-p52.1
1472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p75.1
1473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p211.1
1474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vi.vi.I-p253.1
1475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.XXII-p64.1
1476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=28#vi.ix.I_1-p212.1
1477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v.CXXV-p139.1
1478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vi.ix.II-p203.1
1479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vi.ix.III-p130.1
1480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi.vi.II-p337.1
1481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.III-p32.1
1482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v.LXII-p6.1
1483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v.LXXXIV-p13.1
1484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v.LXXXV-p11.1
1485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vi.ix.II-p204.1
1486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv.III-p15.1
1487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=2#v.LXI-p7.1
1488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=2#v.LXXXIV-p20.1
1489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=2#v.LIV-p108.1
1490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p205.1
1491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vi.ix.III-p119.1
1492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.LIV-p109.1
1493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.XXII-p190.1
1494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.LVII-p57.1
1495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vi.v-p23.1
1496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p276.1
1497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p277.1
1498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.LXVI-p77.1
1499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=20#v.LXX-p15.1
1500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.XXII-p37.1
1501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.XXII-p353.1
1502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.LXVI-p79.1
1503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v.XXII-p354.1
1504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=18#v.XXII-p400.1
1505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=20#v.CXXXIII-p77.1
1506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#v.XXII-p191.1
1507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v.XXII-p161.1
1508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v.XLVI-p103.1
1509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v.LVII-p54.1
1510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v.LXXV-p7.1
1511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vi.iv-p73.1
1512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=6#v.CXXX-p93.1
1513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=10#v.XLVI-p52.1
1514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=21#vi.vii-p7.1
1515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=13&scrV=22#v.XXII-p65.1
1516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=12#v.XV-p14.1
1517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=12#v.XXII-p41.1
1518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p70.1
1519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=12#v.XXII-p390.1
1520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=13#v.XXII-p114.1
1521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=13#v.XXII-p43.1
1522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=13#v.CXXXIII-p4.1
1523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=13#vi.ix.III-p112.1
1524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=14#v.LXI-p16.1
1525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=14#vi.ii-p11.1
1526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=15&scrV=1#v.CXXVII-p79.1
1527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=15&scrV=5#v.CVIII-p117.1
1528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=16&scrV=1#v.LIII-p88.1
1529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=16&scrV=1#v.LIV-p106.1
1530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=16&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p242.1
1531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=18&scrV=2#v.LI-p10.1
1532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=19&scrV=18#v.CVIII-p168.1
1533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=19&scrV=19#v.XCVII-p6.1
1534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vi.vii-p8.1
1535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=20&scrV=2#v.XL-p4.1
1536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=21&scrV=9#v.CXIII-p6.1
1537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=12#v.CXXII-p17.1
1538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=12#v.CXLVII-p31.1
1539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=23&scrV=15#v.CXXX-p105.1
1540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=24&scrV=2#v.CXXVIII-p37.1
1541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=24&scrV=16#v.XLVIII-p102.1
1542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=24&scrV=21#vi.ix.II-p208.1
1543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=12#v.CXXV-p147.1
1544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=18#v.XXII-p355.1
1545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=20#v.XXII-p244.1
1546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=20#vi.viii-p126.1
1547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=27&scrV=11#v.LXIX-p41.1
1548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=9#v.CXXX-p54.1
1549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=9#v.CVIII-p206.1
1550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=12#vi.ix.II-p82.1
1551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=15#v.CXLVII-p30.1
1552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=16#v.CVIII-p148.1
1553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=24#v.XXII-p171.1
1554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p67.1
1555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=11#v.LIII-p49.1
1556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=14#v.CXXXIII-p133.1
1557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=15#v.CXXII-p21.1
1558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=15#v.CXLVII-p59.1
1559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=30&scrV=17#v.LX-p132.1
1560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=31&scrV=6#v.CXXII-p48.1
1561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=31&scrV=9#v.XXII-p176.1
1562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=31&scrV=9#v.LVII-p86.1
1563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=6#v.LI-p60.1
1564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=6#v.CXLVI-p5.1
1565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=9#v.LXIX-p43.1
1566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=20#v.XXVII-p21.1
1567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=32&scrV=20#v.CVIII-p76.1
1568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=15#v.LXXV-p30.1
1569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=33&scrV=15#v.CXXV-p134.1
1570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=5#v.XXII-p23.1
1571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=5#v.CXXV-p43.1
1572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p213.1
1573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=14#vi.vii-p7.1
1574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=34&scrV=15#v.XXII-p65.1
1575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=37&scrV=22#vi.vi.I-p279.1
1576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=0#v.XXXVIII-p6.1
1577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=19#vi.vi.I-p55.1
1578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=38&scrV=19#vi.vi.I-p197.1
1579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=3#v.LVII-p66.1
1580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p220.1
1581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=5#vi.viii-p112.1
1582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=6#v.LXXIX-p48.1
1583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=12#v.XXII-p373.1
1584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=12#v.LXIX-p56.1
1585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=15#v.XII-p11.1
1586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=17#vi.ix.II-p249.1
1587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=41&scrV=8#v.LXXIX-p6.1
1588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=14#v.XVII-p21.1
1589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=43&scrV=26#vi.ix.I_1-p101.1
1590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=9#vi.ix.II-p214.1
1591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=21#v.CXXII-p49.1
1592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=4#vi.v-p32.1
1593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=8#v.CXXII-p50.1
1594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=1#v.LXXVII-p38.1
1595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=1#v.XXII-p59.1
1596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=47&scrV=14#v.LXXVII-p39.1
1597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=0#vii.ii.viii-p6.2
1598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=2#v.LXXV-p35.1
1599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=8#v.CVIII-p211.1
1600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=6#v.L-p27.1
1601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=50&scrV=6#v.LXIX-p118.1
1602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=51&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p212.1
1603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p215.1
1604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=8#vi.viii-p50.1
1605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=1#v.XXII-p177.1
1606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=1#v.LXVI-p28.1
1607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p280.1
1608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=3#v.XXII-p180.1
1609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=56&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p99.1
1610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=3#v.XXII-p346.1
1611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=5#v.XXII-p345.1
1612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p209.1
1613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=1#v.LXXVII-p34.2
1614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=60&scrV=6#v.LXXIX-p28.1
1615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=1#vi.viii-p137.1
1616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p109.1
1617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p330.1
1618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=4#v.LVII-p72.1
1619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=5#v.CXXXIII-p90.1
1620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p14.1
1621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=13#v.CVIII-p275.1
1622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=17#v.CXXIV-p21.1
1623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p83.1
1624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=2#v.IV-p12.1
1625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=2#v.XIV-p84.1
1626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=2#v.XXXIX-p41.1
1627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=5#vi.v-p96.1
1628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=7#v.LXIX-p81.1
1629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=22#v.CXXIV-p43.1
1630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=24#vi.viii-p128.1
1631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.IV-p10.1
1632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p285.1
1633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.XXIV-p7.1
1634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.XXII-p186.1
1635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p284.1
1636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p244.1
1637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.XC-p5.1
1638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.LIII-p131.1
1639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.LIII-p132.1
1640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.LXVI-p40.1
1641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.ix.II-p244.1
1642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=0#v.LXXXII-p30.1
1643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.CVIII-p267.1
1644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.CXXVIII-p21.1
1645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.LI-p51.1
1646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.CVIII-p167.1
1647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.CXXII-p43.1
1648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=22#v.LXVI-p62.1
1649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=22#v.CXVII-p27.1
1650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=25#v.CXXII-p19.1
1651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=27#v.CXXII-p44.1
1652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=32#vi.vi.I-p281.1
1653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.CXXII-p47.1
1654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.XXII-p118.1
1655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.CXVII-p28.1
1656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.CXXIII-p57.1
1657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.CXLVII-p49.1
1658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.CXXII-p45.1
1659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.ix.i-p25.1
1660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.LXIX-p46.1
1661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=22#v.XLI-p20.1
1662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p226.1
1663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.CXXIII-p85.1
1664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi.v-p52.1
1665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi.vi.II-p342.1
1666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi.vii-p12.1
1667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.vi.II-p338.1
1668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.LIV-p69.1
1669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=4#v.LVIII-p40.1
1670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p339.1
1671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=16#vi.vi.II-p300.1
1672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=7&scrV=21#vi.ix.II-p227.1
1673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=8&scrV=4#v.XLI-p19.1
1674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=8&scrV=4#v.CXXII-p20.1
1675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=8&scrV=22#v.LXXIX-p30.1
1676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=1#v.XXXIX-p4.1
1677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=1#v.CXXII-p38.1
1678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=21#v.XXII-p251.1
1679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=21#v.LXXVI-p16.1
1680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=21#vi.vi.II-p113.1
1681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=9&scrV=24#v.XXII-p254.1
1682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=11#vii.iii.xiii-p4.1
1683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vi.ix.I_1-p134.1
1684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=23#v.LXXI-p78.1
1685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=23#vi.ix.I_1-p284.1
1686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=23#v.CXXXIII-p95.1
1687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=10&scrV=23#vi.ix.I_1-p204.1
1688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=11&scrV=14#v.LXXXII-p12.1
1689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.XXXIX-p13.1
1690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v.LI-p7.1
1691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v.LII-p51.1
1692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.VII-p19.1
1693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=6#v.XL-p5.1
1694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=23#v.CVIII-p105.1
1695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=23#v.LIII-p133.1
1696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=23#v.LXIX-p85.1
1697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=23#v.XCVII-p18.1
1698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=23#vi.ix.II-p228.1
1699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=13&scrV=26#v.XXII-p62.1
1700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=14&scrV=11#v.CXXVII-p65.1
1701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=14&scrV=15#vi.ix.II-p132.2
1702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.XXXIX-p12.1
1703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=15&scrV=17#v.CXXVIII-p14.1
1704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=16&scrV=2#v.XXII-p185.1
1705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=16&scrV=2#v.CXXIII-p92.1
1706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=9#vi.ix.I_1-p285.1
1707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=11#v.CXXXIII-p74.1
1708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=13#vi.ix.II-p131.2
1709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p230.1
1710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=16#v.CXXX-p74.1
1711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=3#vi.viii-p133.1
1712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=7#vi.ix.III-p48.1
1713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=18&scrV=7#v.CXXII-p90.1
1714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=20&scrV=14#v.XXXIX-p11.1
1715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=20&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p231.1
1716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vi.ix.II-p231.1
1717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=20&scrV=18#vi.ix.II-p231.1
1718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=22&scrV=10#v.CXXII-p39.1
1719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=23#vi.ix.II-p232.1
1720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=28#v.CXXII-p103.1
1721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=28#vi.ix.I_1-p103.1
1722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=24&scrV=1#v.XXXI-p19.1
1723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=24&scrV=3#v.XXXI-p20.1
1724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=24&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p233.1
1725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=26&scrV=21#vi.ix.II-p234.1
1726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=27&scrV=6#v.LX-p127.1
1727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=28&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p340.1
1728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=14#v.LXXXIV-p67.2
1729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=20#v.LIV-p66.1
1730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=22#v.XXII-p36.1
1731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=30&scrV=10#vi.ix.II-p239.1
1732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=22#vi.vi.I-p282.1
1733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=31#vi.vi.II-p275.1
1734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=33#v.XXII-p357.1
1735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=33#vi.vi.II-p276.1
1736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=31&scrV=34#vi.ix.II-p236.1
1737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=30#vi.ix.II-p237.1
1738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=0#v.LVIII-p56.1
1739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=6#v.CXXV-p52.1
1740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=11#v.LVIII-p60.1
1741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=18#vi.vi.II-p183.1
1742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=35&scrV=19#v.LVIII-p57.1
1743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=36&scrV=0#v.XXXI-p9.1
1744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=36&scrV=23#v.XXXI-p14.1
1745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=37&scrV=18#vi.ix.II-p238.1
1746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=38&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p100.1
1747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=39&scrV=11#vi.vi.I-p285.1
1748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=40&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p285.1
1749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=50&scrV=23#v.CVII-p36.1
1750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=6#v.XLVI-p89.1
1751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p330.1
1752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=51&scrV=6#vi.vi.II-p338.1
1753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.LIII-p134.1
1754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.CXXII-p41.1
1755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.CXXII-p56.1
1756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=24#v.XXII-p338.1
1757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=26#vi.ix.II-p245.1
1758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=27#v.L-p15.1
1759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=27#v.XXII-p337.1
1760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=30#v.XXII-p337.1
1761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=3&scrV=31#v.XXII-p337.1
1762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.XXII-p189.1
1763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p143.1
1764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Lam&scrCh=4&scrV=20#vi.ix.II-p187.1
1765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.vi.I-p286.1
1766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.LIII-p147.1
1767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.LIII-p149.1
1768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.LIII-p150.1
1769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.LIII-p148.1
1770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.XXXIX-p50.1
1771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.LIII-p151.1
1772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=18#v.LIII-p146.1
1773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.LIII-p152.1
1774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.LXIX-p54.1
1775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.LXIX-p95.1
1776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.CXXIV-p9.1
1777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.CXLVII-p29.1
1778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.CXXII-p15.1
1779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.CXLVII-p29.1
1780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.LXVI-p40.1
1781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.XL-p6.1
1782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.LXX-p16.1
1783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p203.1
1784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v.XLVI-p13.1
1785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=8&scrV=14#v.LVIII-p46.1
1786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=10&scrV=8#v.LXVI-p9.1
1787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=10&scrV=18#v.CVIII-p127.1
1788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=12&scrV=27#v.CXLVII-p11.1
1789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=13&scrV=10#v.CXXXIII-p63.1
1790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p201.1
1791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p204.1
1792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=14&scrV=20#vi.vi.I-p201.1
1793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=1#v.CVII-p50.1
1794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=4#v.XXII-p105.1
1795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=6#v.CXLVII-p27.1
1796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=11#v.XXXI-p8.1
1797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=12#v.LIV-p72.1
1798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p216.1
1799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=25#v.XXII-p63.1
1800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=25#v.LXXIX-p108.1
1801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=25#v.CXXV-p82.1
1802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=42#v.LXVIII-p11.1
1803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=55#v.XLVI-p60.1
1804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=55#vi.ix.I_1-p144.1
1805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=60#vi.ix.II-p217.1
1806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=62#vi.vi.II-p306.1
1807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=4#v.XXXIX-p17.1
1808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=4#v.LX-p54.1
1809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=4#v.CXLVII-p69.1
1810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=4#vi.vi.I-p202.1
1811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=4#vi.ix.III-p87.1
1812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=20#v.XXXIX-p16.1
1813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=20#v.LIV-p49.1
1814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=20#v.CVII-p39.1
1815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=23#v.XLI-p18.1
1816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=23#v.LXXVII-p33.1
1817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=23#vi.ix.I_1-p241.1
1818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=30#v.CXXII-p22.1
1819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=25#v.LXXIX-p111.1
1820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=20&scrV=43#vi.ix.II-p221.1
1821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=23&scrV=3#v.LXXIX-p109.1
1822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=24&scrV=15#v.XL-p7.1
1823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=24&scrV=16#v.CXXIII-p93.1
1824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=24&scrV=18#vi.vi.I-p287.1
1825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=24&scrV=27#v.CXXIII-p93.1
1826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=25&scrV=13#vi.v-p80.1
1827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=28&scrV=3#vi.ix.II-p44.2
1828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=28&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p70.2
1829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=32&scrV=17#vi.ix.II-p223.1
1830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=10#v.CXXII-p18.1
1831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=11#v.XI-p9.1
1832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=11#v.CXXII-p23.1
1833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=11#v.CXLVII-p25.1
1834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=12#v.LIV-p40.1
1835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=12#v.CXXII-p83.1
1836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=12#v.CXXII-p101.1
1837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=17#vi.vi.II-p231.1
1838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=18#v.CXXVII-p53.1
1839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=20#vi.vi.II-p231.1
1840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=21#vi.vi.II-p231.1
1841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=31#vi.vi.II-p232.1
1842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=24#v.LXIX-p96.1
1843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=31#vi.vi.II-p307.1
1844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=37&scrV=1#vi.viii-p113.1
1845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=44&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p7.4
1846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=44&scrV=2#v.XLVIII-p193.1
1847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=44&scrV=10#vi.vi.II-p284.1
1848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=44&scrV=15#vi.ix.II-p224.1
1849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=44&scrV=22#vi.vi.I-p153.2
1850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=46&scrV=20#vi.ix.I_1-p283.1
1851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=47&scrV=1#v.LXIX-p59.1
1852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=47&scrV=8#v.LXIX-p59.1
1853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p175.1
1854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p200.1
1855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.XXII-p86.1
1856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.LIV-p65.1
1857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p175.1
1858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=34#v.LXI-p15.1
1859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=45#v.XXII-p164.1
1860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=45#v.LIII-p135.1
1861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=45#v.LXI-p15.1
1862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=25#v.LXXIX-p42.1
1863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=25#v.CXXX-p127.1
1864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.LXXV-p38.1
1865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.CIX-p37.1
1866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.CXXX-p125.1
1867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vi.ix.II-p247.1
1868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=25#v.CXXX-p125.1
1869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=27#v.LXVI-p36.1
1870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=27#v.CVIII-p183.1
1871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=32#v.CXXX-p125.1
1872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=33#v.CVII-p8.1
1873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.XXII-p210.1
1874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.I-p20.1
1875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.XXII-p250.1
1876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v.CXXIII-p148.1
1877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p251.1
1878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=20#vi.ix.II-p252.1
1879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=23#v.XXII-p88.1
1880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=23#v.XLVII-p9.1
1881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=23#vi.vi.II-p176.1
1882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=9&scrV=24#vi.ix.II-p253.1
1883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vi.viii-p127.1
1884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.LIII-p31.1
1885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.LIII-p91.1
1886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.CXXIII-p84.1
1887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.LXX-p14.1
1888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=0#vii.ii.viii-p6.1
1889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.CXXII-p28.1
1890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.CXXIII-p108.1
1891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.CXXII-p27.1
1892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vi.ix.II-p190.1
1893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.LIII-p92.1
1894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.LIII-p92.1
1895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.CXXIII-p108.1
1896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.LIII-p92.1
1897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.CXIII-p5.1
1898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=4#v.XXII-p132.1
1899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p122.1
1900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=6#v.XXII-p132.1
1901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.XXXI-p15.1
1902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vi.iv-p56.1
1903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=9&scrV=11#v.CXXXIII-p131.1
1904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=9&scrV=14#v.CXXXIII-p131.1
1905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=1#v.LVII-p50.1
1906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vii.iii.ii-p2.1
1907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=8#v.CXXII-p52.1
1908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=11&scrV=9#vi.ix.II-p191.1
1909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=14#v.LX-p10.1
1910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=14#v.LXXV-p6.1
1911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=15#v.LX-p9.1
1912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=13&scrV=15#v.LXXV-p5.1
1913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.LIII-p93.1
1914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.vi.II-p213.1
1915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.CXXII-p51.1
1916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.LII-p87.1
1917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi.vi.II-p213.1
1918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=29#v.LIII-p94.1
1919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.LXXXVII-p4.1
1920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.XLVIII-p188.1
1921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p124.1
1922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.XLVI-p98.1
1923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.CXXX-p101.1
1924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.CXLVII-p24.1
1925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p182.1
1926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.CXXIII-p20.1
1927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=3&scrV=83#v.CXXIII-p20.1
1928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.LIII-p98.1
1929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.XXII-p54.1
1930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.CXVIII-p11.1
1931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v.LVII-p88.1
1932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=11#v.LIII-p99.1
1933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vi.ix.II-p192.1
1934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p241.1
1935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=7&scrV=1#v.LIII-p100.1
1936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v.LIII-p101.1
1937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=7&scrV=12#v.XL-p8.1
1938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.XIV-p81.1
1939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.LIII-p97.1
1940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.LIII-p104.1
1941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=11#v.LIII-p105.1
1942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=8&scrV=13#v.XXII-p55.1
1943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Obad&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.XXII-p42.1
1944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p54.1
1945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.CXXXIII-p136.1
1946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p193.1
1947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.III-p47.1
1948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.XXXIX-p42.1
1949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.ix.III-p47.1
1950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.XVI-p7.1
1951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.LXXVII-p28.1
1952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.XVI-p7.1
1953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi.ix.III-p49.1
1954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jonah&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.CVII-p35.1
1955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p166.1
1956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.CVIII-p166.1
1957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=4&scrV=8#v.CVIII-p99.1
1958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.LIII-p108.1
1959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.LVII-p61.1
1960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.CVIII-p84.1
1961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=6&scrV=8#vi.ix.II-p195.1
1962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p194.1
1963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mic&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v.LXIX-p92.1
1964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.ix.II-p218.1
1965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.LXVIII-p14.1
1966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.LIII-p110.1
1967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Nah&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.LIII-p109.1
1968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi.ix.I_1-p282.2
1969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.LX-p120.1
1970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.LI-p64.1
1971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.LI-p64.1
1972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.XXII-p38.1
1973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.LI-p64.1
1974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.LIII-p112.1
1975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.ix.I_1-p282.1
1976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.XCVII-p4.1
1977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.LIII-p113.1
1978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p163.2
1979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.LXVI-p10.1
1980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.III-p5.1
1981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi.ix.II-p199.1
1982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.LIII-p115.1
1983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zeph&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.LIII-p117.1
1984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.XLV-p18.1
1985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.LXXVI-p21.1
1986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.LIII-p120.1
1987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Hag&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.LIII-p27.1
1988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p66.1
1989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p200.1
1990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.LIII-p123.1
1991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.LIII-p124.1
1992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.CVIII-p147.1
1993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.LIII-p125.1
1994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=6&scrV=1#v.LIII-p126.1
1995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p267.1
1996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.XXVII-p20.1
1997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.LIII-p128.1
1998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=9&scrV=10#v.LIII-p127.1
1999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=9&scrV=16#v.XXII-p158.1
2000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=9&scrV=16#v.CVIII-p184.1
2001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=9&scrV=16#vi.ix.II-p202.1
2002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=9&scrV=17#vi.vi.I-p267.1
2003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=12#v.LVII-p42.1
2004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=12#v.LVII-p44.1
2005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=11&scrV=15#v.LII-p39.1
2006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.viii-p78.1
2007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v.LVII-p46.1
2008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vii.iii.ii-p2.2
2009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=13&scrV=7#v.LVII-p48.1
2010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.CXXIV-p37.1
2011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.CXXXIII-p117.1
2012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.LII-p65.1
2013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.LIII-p130.1
2014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vi.vi.I-p86.1
2015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.LVII-p65.1
2016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p126.1
2017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.CXLVII-p50.1
2018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.CXLVII-p21.1
2019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.CXLVII-p21.1
2020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.XLVIII-p194.1
2021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.XV-p12.1
2022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.CVIII-p143.1
2023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vi.vi.II-p263.1
2024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.XXXIX-p73.1
2025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.vi.I-p187.2
2026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.LI-p71.1
2027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.v-p9.1
2028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.v-p29.1
2029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.v-p41.1
2030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.v-p42.1
2031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=22#v.LVII-p57.1
2032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vi.v-p17.1
2033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.LVII-p59.1
2034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p82.1
2035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p84.1
2036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.LVII-p49.1
2037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.LVII-p53.1
2038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.LX-p17.1
2039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.CXXII-p78.1
2040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ix.I_1-p227.1
2041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi.iv-p73.1
2042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.XXII-p103.1
2043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.XXXVIII-p23.1
2044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.CVII-p19.1
2045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p19.1
2046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.XCVII-p16.1
2047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.XXII-p157.1
2048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.XIV-p65.1
2049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.CIX-p42.1
2050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.CXXIII-p90.1
2051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=11#vi.iv-p83.1
2052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v.CXXII-p104.1
2053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.XLVI-p95.1
2054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.LXIX-p74.1
2055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.XXXI-p10.1
2056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.LXIX-p61.1
2057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.LXIX-p74.1
2058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.CXXX-p50.1
2059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.CXXX-p116.1
2060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.III-p38.1
2061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.XXII-p91.1
2062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.CXXX-p118.1
2063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.III-p39.1
2064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vi.ix.I_1-p228.1
2065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.XIV-p48.1
2066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.XXXVIII-p31.1
2067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.LIII-p165.1
2068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.LXXIX-p37.1
2069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.LXXI-p14.1
2070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.CXXV-p57.1
2071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=23#vi.ix.I_1-p229.1
2072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vi.vi.II-p198.1
2073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p179.1
2074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.LI-p86.1
2075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.CXXV-p16.1
2076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi.ix.III-p92.1
2077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.LXXXII-p5.1
2078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=10#v.CVIII-p201.1
2079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.XV-p16.1
2080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.XIV-p92.1
2081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.CXXV-p10.1
2082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=13#vi.iv-p50.1
2083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.XV-p15.1
2084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.LVIII-p24.1
2085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p43.1
2086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.ii-p55.1
2087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=15#vi.iv-p58.1
2088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.III-p48.1
2089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vi.vi.II-p277.1
2090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.XIV-p88.1
2091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=22#v.LI-p9.1
2092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vi.ix.II-p26.1
2093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vi.ix.II-p75.1
2094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vi.vi.I-p191.1
2095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.XIII-p6.1
2096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.LXXXII-p13.1
2097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=23#vi.ix.II-p76.1
2098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=25#v.CXXVII-p11.1
2099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=25#v.CXXX-p79.1
2100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=26#v.IV-p10.1
2101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=27#vi.vi.I-p192.1
2102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#v.XXII-p56.1
2103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#v.LXXVI-p17.1
2104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#v.CXXV-p40.1
2105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#vi.ix.I_1-p238.1
2106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=32#v.LV-p21.1
2107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=34#vi.vi.II-p200.1
2108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=35#v.XLVI-p69.1
2109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=37#vi.ix.II-p77.1
2110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=38#v.CXXIII-p97.1
2111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=39#v.LXXXIV-p8.1
2112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=39#v.CVIII-p197.1
2113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=40#v.LIII-p164.1
2114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=42#v.LIV-p77.1
2115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#v.LXXXIV-p70.1
2116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#v.CXXXIII-p101.1
2117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=48#vi.ix.I_1-p106.1
2118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=2#v.XXII-p302.1
2119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=2#v.XXIII-p17.1
2120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=3#v.XXII-p259.1
2121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.LII-p106.1
2122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.XXII-p245.1
2123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vi.ix.I_1-p209.1
2124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.XIII-p7.1
2125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p33.1
2126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.LV-p9.1
2127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.XXII-p261.1
2128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.XXII-p259.1
2129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.XXIV-p15.1
2130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=19#v.CXXV-p25.1
2131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v.LXXI-p55.1
2132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v.LXXVI-p22.1
2133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=21#v.XXII-p286.1
2134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=23#vi.viii-p28.1
2135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=23#vi.iv-p59.1
2136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=23#vi.iv-p60.1
2137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=24#v.XLVIII-p181.1
2138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=24#v.XXII-p291.1
2139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=24#v.LX-p64.1
2140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=24#v.LXXI-p45.1
2141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=25#v.XXII-p293.1
2142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=25#v.CXXIII-p136.1
2143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=25#v.XXII-p296.1
2144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=26#v.CXXIII-p125.1
2145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=27#v.CXXIII-p136.1
2146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=28#v.CXXIII-p125.1
2147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=32#v.XXII-p294.1
2148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#v.XIV-p6.1
2149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#v.XXII-p308.1
2150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#v.CXXIII-p124.1
2151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=34#v.III-p27.1
2152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=34#v.LV-p2.1
2153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=34#v.LV-p4.1
2154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=34#vi.ix.II-p79.1
2155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=34#v.CXXIII-p136.1
2156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=1#v.XLVI-p82.1
2157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=3#v.XLV-p14.1
2158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=3#v.L-p8.1
2159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=3#v.LII-p122.1
2160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=5#v.LXIX-p29.1
2161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=6#v.LXXXIV-p22.1
2162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=6#vi.iv-p54.1
2163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v.XXX-p4.1
2164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=8#v.LIII-p157.1
2165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#vi.ix.III-p97.1
2166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=13#v.CXXXIII-p100.1
2167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.XXII-p234.1
2168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p80.1
2169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=15#v.XXII-p365.1
2170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=15#v.CXLVII-p77.1
2171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vi.iv-p57.1
2172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.CXXII-p110.1
2173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=0#vi.ii-p37.1
2174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=10#v.LXXIX-p17.1
2175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vi.iv-p128.1
2176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#v.LXXI-p7.1
2177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=12#v.CXXX-p77.1
2178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=20#v.XIV-p50.1
2179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=20#v.XXII-p195.1
2180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=21#v.XXXVIII-p34.1
2181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=22#v.XIV-p28.1
2182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=22#v.LIV-p11.1
2183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=22#v.CXXII-p40.1
2184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=25#v.CVIII-p309.1
2185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=25#v.CIX-p39.1
2186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=25#vi.ix.III-p88.1
2187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=26#vi.iv-p129.1
2188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=1#v.CXXII-p117.1
2189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.XIV-p49.1
2190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.XXXVIII-p32.1
2191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.CXVIII-p31.1
2192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=12#v.XI-p8.1
2193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=12#vi.ix.II-p84.1
2194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.CXXII-p74.1
2195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=17#vi.vi.I-p265.1
2196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=20#v.LXXI-p19.1
2197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=21#vi.iv-p131.1
2198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=22#vi.iv-p127.1
2199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=24#v.CXVIII-p8.1
2200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=27#v.CXLVII-p57.1
2201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=29#vi.iv-p132.1
2202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=7#vi.ix.I_1-p230.1
2203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=8#vi.ii-p57.1
2204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=9#vi.ix.II-p87.1
2205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=9#vi.vi.II-p94.1
2206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.CXXIII-p141.1
2207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=10#v.XXIII-p25.1
2208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=10#v.XXII-p168.1
2209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p291.1
2210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v.XXXIV-p4.1
2211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=16#v.LVIII-p63.1
2212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=22#vi.ix.II-p90.1
2213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=23#v.CXXX-p90.1
2214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=23#v.CXLVII-p17.1
2215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=24#v.CXLVII-p18.1
2216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=25#v.XXXVIII-p38.1
2217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=34#v.XXII-p40.1
2218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=37#v.XIV-p23.1
2219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=37#v.CVIII-p230.1
2220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=37#vi.viii-p40.1
2221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=40#v.LXXV-p33.1
2222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=40#v.CIX-p8.1
2223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.CXXX-p22.1
2224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=8#v.CXXX-p18.1
2225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=10#vi.iv-p78.1
2226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#vi.iv-p77.1
2227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#vi.vi.II-p272.1
2228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=12#v.XXII-p388.1
2229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=12#v.LX-p18.1
2230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p192.1
2231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=13#vi.vi.I-p353.1
2232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p60.1
2233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=14#v.CXXX-p20.1
2234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=18#vi.ii-p6.1
2235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vi.ix.III-p125.1
2236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#v.LXXVI-p8.1
2237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#v.LXXIX-p4.1
2238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#v.LXXXII-p9.1
2239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=30#vi.ix.II-p20.1
2240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.LII-p91.1
2241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=20#v.CXXI-p4.1
2242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=24#v.XLII-p9.1
2243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=25#v.XLII-p8.1
2244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=30#v.XIV-p11.1
2245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=30#v.XV-p26.1
2246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=32#v.XLII-p5.1
2247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=32#v.XLII-p15.1
2248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=35#v.LVIII-p4.1
2249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=36#v.XIV-p87.1
2250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=36#v.LX-p75.1
2251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=36#v.LXXV-p18.1
2252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=36#v.CXXX-p80.1
2253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=39#v.CXXXIII-p137.1
2254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=41#v.CXXII-p73.1
2255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=46#vi.v-p62.1
2256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=49#v.XXII-p356.1
2257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=50#v.XIV-p27.1
2258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=50#v.LXXI-p35.1
2259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=3#v.CXXXIII-p33.1
2260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=7#v.XLVIII-p192.1
2261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=7#v.XXII-p292.1
2262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.XXII-p124.1
2263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.XLVIII-p17.1
2264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.LXVI-p7.1
2265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.CXXIII-p60.1
2266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.CXXIV-p27.1
2267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=10#v.XLVIII-p101.1
2268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=11#v.CXXXIII-p33.1
2269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=22#v.XXII-p292.1
2270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=22#v.XV-p11.1
2271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=24#vi.iv-p174.1
2272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=25#v.CXXX-p71.1
2273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=31#v.LXVI-p26.1
2274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=31#v.LXXIX-p27.1
2275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=33#v.LXVI-p27.1
2276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=44#v.LXVI-p59.1
2277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=45#v.LXVI-p60.1
2278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=45#v.LIV-p68.1
2279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=45#v.CXXV-p25.1
2280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=46#v.X-p18.1
2281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=46#v.XV-p9.1
2282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=46#v.CVII-p28.1
2283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=54#vi.v-p66.1
2284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=55#vi.v-p101.1
2285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=58#v.XIV-p59.1
2286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=13#v.CVIII-p159.1
2287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=15#v.XLVI-p106.1
2288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=15#v.XLVIII-p117.1
2289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=25#v.CVIII-p291.1
2290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=25#v.XXX-p6.1
2291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vi.vi.I-p316.1
2292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vi.viii-p162.1
2293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=29#v.CVIII-p292.1
2294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=31#vi.ix.II-p91.1
2295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=31#v.CVIII-p293.1
2296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=31#vi.vi.II-p274.1
2297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=32#vi.ii-p68.1
2298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=19#v.LXXIX-p89.1
2299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=19#vi.ix.II-p92.1
2300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=22#v.CXXII-p118.1
2301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=24#v.CVIII-p87.1
2302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=26#v.LVIII-p64.1
2303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=27#v.XI-p7.1
2304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=28#v.XVI-p4.1
2305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=32#v.XLVIII-p124.1
2306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=32#v.XLVI-p107.1
2307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=32#v.XLVIII-p117.1
2308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#vi.vi.II-p203.1
2309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#v.XV-p20.1
2310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#v.CVIII-p69.1
2311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#v.XLI-p8.1
2312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#vi.vi.I-p215.1
2313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#vi.vi.II-p31.1
2314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#v.XIV-p25.1
2315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#v.XXXVIII-p28.1
2316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=24#v.CXXI-p5.1
2317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=25#vi.ix.II-p93.1
2318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=26#v.CVIII-p226.1
2319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=1#v.XLVI-p105.1
2320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=2#vi.viii-p109.1
2321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=15#vi.ix.II-p111.1
2322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=19#vi.ix.II-p119.1
2323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=20#vi.ii-p63.1
2324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=20#vi.iv-p130.1
2325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=21#vi.vi.II-p185.1
2326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=3#v.XII-p4.1
2327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=6#vi.vi.I-p190.1
2328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p94.1
2329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=8#v.LI-p26.1
2330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=8#v.CXXV-p39.1
2331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=10#v.LXXV-p15.1
2332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=11#v.XLII-p7.1
2333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=15#v.CXXV-p140.1
2334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=18#vi.vi.I-p216.1
2335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=21#v.CXXII-p85.1
2336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=4#vi.ix.III-p59.2
2337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=5#v.LV-p16.1
2338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p45.1
2339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=6#v.XLVIII-p30.1
2340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=9#v.XLVIII-p26.1
2341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=9#v.LXXVII-p10.1
2342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p96.1
2343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=10#v.LV-p22.1
2344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=11#v.XXII-p155.1
2345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=12#v.XIV-p53.1
2346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=12#v.XLVIII-p144.1
2347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=12#v.LXVI-p51.1
2348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=12#v.CXXIII-p67.1
2349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=12#vi.vi.I-p307.1
2350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=12#vi.vi.I-p311.1
2351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=16#v.CXXX-p151.1
2352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#v.XIV-p52.1
2353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#v.LVIII-p18.1
2354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#v.LX-p63.1
2355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#v.LXVI-p50.1
2356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#v.LXXIX-p35.1
2357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vi.ix.II-p97.1
2358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#v.CXXX-p151.1
2359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#v.CXLV-p11.1
2360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vi.vi.I-p292.1
2361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vi.vi.II-p94.1
2362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vi.vi.II-p95.1
2363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vi.vii-p59.1
2364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vi.ix.I_1-p74.1
2365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=23#v.LXXIX-p22.1
2366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=24#v.CXLV-p10.1
2367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=24#vi.ix.I_1-p72.1
2368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=26#v.XXIV-p16.1
2369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=27#vi.vi.I-p207.1
2370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=28#v.XVI-p20.1
2371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=28#v.LXXI-p48.1
2372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=29#v.LXVI-p46.1
2373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=29#vi.vi.II-p219.1
2374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=29#vi.vi.II-p270.1
2375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=30#v.XLVI-p80.1
2376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=15#v.XI-p21.1
2377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=15#v.LXIX-p4.1
2378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=15#v.LXXVII-p85.1
2379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=16#v.XXII-p207.1
2380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=16#vi.vii-p61.1
2381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=23#vi.vi.II-p281.1
2382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=26#vi.vi.II-p311.1
2383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=27#vi.vi.I-p218.1
2384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.LXVI-p94.1
2385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=30#v.CVIII-p135.1
2386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v.XXII-p216.1
2387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p130.1
2388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v.XXII-p399.1
2389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=2#v.XXVII-p20.1
2390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=9#v.XXII-p401.1
2391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=12#v.XXII-p218.1
2392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=12#v.CXXV-p150.1
2393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=33#v.XLII-p6.1
2394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=11#v.XIV-p73.1
2395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=13#v.LXXX-p15.1
2396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=13#vi.viii-p122.1
2397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=14#v.XXII-p207.1
2398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=14#vi.vii-p61.1
2399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=29#v.CVIII-p282.1
2400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=30#v.LXXV-p21.1
2401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=30#v.LXXXIV-p38.1
2402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=30#vi.vi.I-p317.1
2403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=30#vi.viii-p101.1
2404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=32#vi.vii-p22.1
2405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=5#v.LII-p107.1
2406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=6#v.XII-p10.1
2407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=10#v.CXLIV-p27.1
2408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=23#v.LXIX-p30.1
2409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=26#vi.ix.II-p98.1
2410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=27#v.LVIII-p16.1
2411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=27#v.CVIII-p189.1
2412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=37#v.XLVI-p5.1
2413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=37#v.LVIII-p22.1
2414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=37#v.XLVI-p39.1
2415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=38#v.XXII-p220.1
2416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=38#v.LVIII-p38.1
2417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=12#v.LII-p40.1
2418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=12#v.CXXVII-p70.1
2419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=13#v.XXII-p206.1
2420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=17#v.XXII-p10.1
2421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=17#v.LXXI-p21.1
2422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=17#v.CXLV-p6.1
2423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=19#v.CXXIII-p150.1
2424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=19#vi.v-p121.1
2425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=19#vi.vi.I-p103.1
2426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=19#v.CXXI-p6.1
2427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=24#vi.viii-p86.1
2428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=28#v.XV-p10.1
2429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=46#v.XIV-p102.1
2430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=1#v.XLIV-p6.1
2431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=1#vi.vii-p39.1
2432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=1#v.CXXV-p144.1
2433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=1#v.CXXX-p135.1
2434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=3#v.XXII-p57.1
2435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=4#v.VII-p39.1
2436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=4#v.LIV-p86.1
2437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=10#v.XXII-p57.1
2438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p264.1
2439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=15#vi.vi.II-p313.1
2440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=31#v.LIX-p4.1
2441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=33#v.XXII-p242.1
2442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vi.vi.II-p215.1
2443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#v.IV-p5.1
2444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=35#v.LIV-p79.1
2445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#v.LVIII-p66.1
2446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#v.XLVI-p71.1
2447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#v.LXXX-p14.1
2448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#vi.vi.II-p216.1
2449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p288.1
2450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=6#v.LXXI-p30.1
2451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=8#vi.vii-p37.1
2452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=15#v.XIV-p42.1
2453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=15#v.XXII-p318.1
2454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=26#v.XLVIII-p125.1
2455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=29#v.XLVIII-p125.1
2456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=29#v.CXX-p5.1
2457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=31#v.LVII-p48.1
2458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=33#v.XLII-p13.1
2459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=39#vi.ix.II-p100.1
2460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=40#v.XXII-p377.1
2461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=40#v.CIX-p30.1
2462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=41#v.CXXXIII-p113.1
2463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=41#v.CXXXIII-p124.1
2464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=48#v.LXXXII-p16.1
2465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=49#v.CXXV-p6.1
2466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=52#v.CXXIII-p99.1
2467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=74#v.XLII-p12.1
2468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p325.1
2469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=9#v.LVII-p40.1
2470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=28#v.XIV-p106.1
2471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=29#v.LIV-p88.1
2472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=46#vi.ix.III-p122.2
2473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=50#v.CXX-p11.1
2474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=51#v.XIV-p89.1
2475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=51#v.XXII-p219.1
2476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=51#v.XLVI-p66.1
2477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=51#v.XLVI-p40.1
2478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=52#vi.viii-p136.1
2479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=52#v.LX-p15.1
2480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=53#v.XLVI-p66.1
2481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=55#vi.v-p70.1
2482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=64#v.XIV-p108.1
2483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=66#v.CXX-p9.1
2484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=1#v.XII-p9.1
2485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=1#v.CXX-p6.1
2486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=2#v.CVIII-p65.1
2487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=9#v.XII-p9.1
2488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=9#v.LIX-p6.2
2489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=9#v.CXX-p7.1
2490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=9#v.CXX-p8.1
2491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.XLVI-p43.1
2492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#v.LXIX-p79.1
2493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#vi.v-p33.1
2494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.LVII-p64.1
2495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.iv-p80.1
2496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.iv-p81.1
2497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.CXXV-p36.1
2498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=30#v.XXXVIII-p12.1
2499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=25#v.LVII-p67.1
2500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.CXLVI-p17.1
2501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.CVIII-p238.1
2502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=27#vi.iv-p119.1
2503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=34#vi.ix.II-p112.1
2504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vi.ii-p37.1
2505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vi.viii-p152.1
2506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=39#v.XXXIX-p77.1
2507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=39#v.LX-p6.1
2508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=41#v.LVII-p39.1
2509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=43#v.CVIII-p288.1
2510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=43#vi.vi.II-p205.1
2511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi.v-p66.1
2512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=3#vi.v-p101.1
2513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p102.1
2514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=8#vi.vi.II-p94.1
2515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.CXXIII-p35.1
2516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vi.ix.II-p103.1
2517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=34#v.XXII-p194.1
2518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p104.1
2519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=29#vi.vi.II-p185.2
2520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=44#v.LXXX-p16.1
2521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=21#v.CXVIII-p28.1
2522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=27#v.LXXIX-p23.1
2523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=28#v.CVIII-p22.1
2524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=29#vi.vi.II-p219.1
2525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vi.vi.II-p270.1
2526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=50#v.CXLVII-p58.1
2527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=41#v.LIII-p166.1
2528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=43#v.LIV-p107.1
2529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=43#v.CXVIII-p43.1
2530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=17#vi.v-p121.1
2531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=32#vi.ix.II-p105.1
2532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p288.1
2533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vi.vii-p37.1
2534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=8#v.LXXI-p29.1
2535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=35#vi.ix.II-p106.1
2536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=37#vi.ix.II-p101.1
2537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=51#v.LXXI-p40.1
2538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=40#vi.v-p71.1
2539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=47#vi.v-p74.1
2540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=1#vi.v-p74.1
2541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=1#v.CXX-p6.2
2542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p108.1
2543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=0#v.LXIX-p65.1
2544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.ix.I_1-p84.1
2545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.LII-p96.2
2546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.CXXX-p20.1
2547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.v-p103.1
2548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.ix.I_1-p89.1
2549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.ix.II-p110.1
2550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.ix.I_1-p90.1
2551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.CXXII-p102.1
2552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.CXXXIII-p142.1
2553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.XLVI-p18.1
2554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=28#v.XXII-p352.1
2555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=29#v.CVII-p46.1
2556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=34#vi.v-p27.1
2557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#vi.viii-p119.1
2558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=39#v.XLVI-p18.1
2559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=41#v.XXIV-p8.1
2560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=41#v.CVII-p18.1
2561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=41#v.CXXIV-p40.1
2562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=41#v.CXXX-p21.1
2563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=43#vi.iv-p75.1
2564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=48#vi.ix.I_1-p141.1
2565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=79#v.CXLVII-p56.1
2566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi.v-p55.1
2567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.XIV-p104.1
2568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.XLVI-p84.1
2569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi.v-p53.1
2570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.XLVI-p96.1
2571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi.v-p43.1
2572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.CVIII-p100.1
2573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.LXXV-p11.1
2574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi.v-p44.1
2575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.CVIII-p77.1
2576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.v-p59.1
2577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=27#vi.v-p24.1
2578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=29#vi.v-p45.1
2579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=33#vi.v-p46.1
2580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=34#v.CXXII-p91.1
2581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=36#v.VII-p40.1
2582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=36#v.LIV-p94.1
2583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=36#v.LIV-p112.1
2584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=36#vi.vi.II-p184.1
2585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=36#v.XXXIX-p81.1
2586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=36#v.CXXIII-p7.1
2587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=36#v.CXXVII-p8.1
2588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=36#v.CXXX-p23.1
2589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=36#v.LXXIX-p115.1
2590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=41#vi.v-p25.1
2591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=43#vi.v-p26.1
2592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=43#v.CVII-p45.1
2593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=46#v.LIII-p34.1
2594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=48#vi.v-p28.1
2595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=51#v.XXII-p130.1
2596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=51#v.CXVII-p12.1
2597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=51#v.CXXX-p138.1
2598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=51#v.XXII-p374.1
2599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=52#v.CVII-p44.1
2600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=11#v.CVIII-p177.1
2601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.XIV-p60.1
2602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vi.ix.III-p73.1
2603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=31#v.CXLVII-p26.1
2604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=31#vi.ii-p24.1
2605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.LVIII-p50.1
2606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.CIX-p32.1
2607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=15#v.CIX-p23.1
2608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v.XIV-p96.1
2609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=21#v.CVIII-p265.1
2610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=42#v.LXVIII-p16.1
2611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=44#v.LVIII-p5.1
2612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p288.1
2613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.XLVI-p108.1
2614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.CVIII-p163.1
2615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.CXVIII-p7.1
2616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=18#v.CXXI-p3.1
2617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=27#v.XXXVIII-p22.1
2618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=27#v.CVIII-p283.1
2619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=28#v.CVIII-p156.1
2620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=28#v.XXXVIII-p21.1
2621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=37#v.XI-p6.1
2622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=38#v.XXXVIII-p17.1
2623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=40#v.XII-p8.1
2624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=47#v.XI-p19.1
2625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=47#v.LIV-p43.1
2626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=47#v.LXXVII-p89.1
2627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=47#vi.ix.II-p41.1
2628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=47#v.CXXII-p86.1
2629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=47#vi.vi.II-p312.1
2630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=48#v.CXXII-p87.1
2631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=8#v.LVIII-p81.1
2632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=10#v.LVIII-p81.1
2633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=21#v.XIV-p27.1
2634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=21#v.CXXV-p49.1
2635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=24#v.CVIII-p309.1
2636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=24#v.CIX-p39.1
2637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=55#vi.vi.II-p205.1
2638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=23#v.XIV-p56.1
2639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=23#v.CVIII-p224.1
2640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=23#v.CXXVII-p39.1
2641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=24#v.CVIII-p225.1
2642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=26#v.LXXVII-p36.1
2643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=31#vi.vi.II-p164.1
2644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=48#v.LXXV-p32.1
2645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=53#v.CXXI-p7.1
2646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=54#vi.ix.II-p113.1
2647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=58#vi.ix.II-p81.1
2648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=59#v.XIV-p24.1
2649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=59#v.XXXIX-p67.1
2650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=61#v.XXXVIII-p33.1
2651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=62#v.III-p28.1
2652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=62#v.XXII-p9.1
2653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=62#v.LXXI-p18.1
2654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=62#v.CXVIII-p34.1
2655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=62#v.CXXV-p14.1
2656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=62#v.CXLV-p7.1
2657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.LXIX-p65.1
2658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p291.1
2659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=18#v.XV-p13.1
2660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=18#v.CXXXIII-p138.1
2661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=18#vi.vi.II-p71.1
2662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=19#v.CXXIV-p9.1
2663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=30#v.LXXVII-p86.1
2664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=30#v.CXLVII-p54.1
2665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=30#v.CVIII-p132.1
2666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=30#v.XLV-p20.1
2667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=34#vi.viii-p134.1
2668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=41#v.XXII-p222.1
2669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=5#v.LX-p71.1
2670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=5#v.XXII-p389.1
2671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=5#v.XXX-p5.1
2672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.XVI-p5.1
2673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=8#v.LX-p71.1
2674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=15#v.CVIII-p240.1
2675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=34#vi.vi.II-p298.1
2676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=41#v.CVIII-p182.1
2677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.LVIII-p87.1
2678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=7#vi.viii-p123.1
2679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=15#v.XXII-p316.1
2680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=20#v.XLIII-p7.1
2681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=20#v.CXXV-p68.1
2682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=20#v.CXXVII-p74.1
2683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=35#v.XXII-p104.1
2684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=35#vi.vii-p40.1
2685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=47#vi.vi.II-p317.1
2686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=48#v.XIV-p85.1
2687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=49#v.LII-p35.1
2688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p260.1
2689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=11#v.CXLVII-p61.1
2690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=29#v.LVIII-p32.1
2691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=32#v.CXXIII-p62.1
2692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vi.vi.II-p278.1
2693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=10#v.XIV-p83.1
2694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=10#v.LVIII-p6.1
2695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=11#v.LXVI-p41.1
2696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v.XXXVIII-p35.1
2697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v.CXVII-p19.1
2698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vi.ix.II-p114.1
2699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v.CXLV-p9.1
2700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=27#v.CXXVII-p39.1
2701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=28#v.XIV-p91.1
2702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=28#v.LXVI-p100.1
2703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=33#v.XIV-p46.1
2704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=33#vi.ii-p9.1
2705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=35#v.CXXV-p11.1
2706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=3#vi.viii-p145.1
2707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=3#v.II-p4.1
2708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=4#v.LXXXII-p25.1
2709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=4#v.CXXII-p76.1
2710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=5#v.XI-p10.1
2711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=5#v.XVI-p10.1
2712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=5#v.LXXVII-p86.1
2713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#v.XI-p20.1
2714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#v.LXXVII-p80.1
2715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=8#v.CXXII-p75.1
2716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.XI-p20.1
2717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.LXXVII-p80.1
2718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.CXXII-p77.1
2719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=11#v.CXXII-p79.1
2720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=11#v.II-p5.1
2721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=19#vi.vi.II-p202.1
2722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=20#v.XI-p11.1
2723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=20#v.XVI-p9.1
2724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=20#v.CXLV-p14.1
2725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=8#v.CXXVII-p60.1
2726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.LII-p80.1
2727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.LIV-p75.1
2728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.LXXI-p51.1
2729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.LXXVII-p71.1
2730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.LXXIX-p36.1
2731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.CVIII-p181.1
2732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.CXVIII-p30.1
2733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.CXXIII-p37.1
2734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#v.CXXX-p41.1
2735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vi.vii-p57.1
2736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=12#v.XXII-p289.1
2737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=12#v.LVIII-p20.1
2738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=13#v.XIV-p55.1
2739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=13#v.CXLVII-p7.1
2740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=15#vi.ix.II-p115.1
2741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=16#v.CXLVII-p7.1
2742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=19#v.XXII-p181.1
2743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=19#v.XXIII-p19.1
2744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=19#v.LXXVII-p44.1
2745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=19#v.XLVIII-p198.1
2746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=22#v.LVIII-p33.1
2747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=23#v.XXXIX-p51.1
2748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=25#v.LXVIII-p13.1
2749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=25#v.CXVIII-p51.1
2750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=29#vi.vi.I-p166.1
2751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p116.1
2752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p273.1
2753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p117.1
2754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=10#v.CXVIII-p26.1
2755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=10#v.CXXXIII-p87.1
2756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=21#v.XLVI-p77.1
2757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=21#v.LVIII-p43.1
2758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=21#v.LX-p23.1
2759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=27#v.CXXIII-p86.1
2760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=37#v.XLVI-p79.1
2761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#v.LX-p72.1
2762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p121.1
2763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#vi.ix.i-p14.2
2764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#v.LXXIX-p10.1
2765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=2#v.LXIII-p6.1
2766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=5#v.LX-p72.1
2767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=8#v.CXXVII-p69.1
2768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=8#vi.iv-p126.1
2769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=9#v.XII-p13.1
2770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=10#v.XVI-p6.1
2771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=11#vi.ix.III-p110.1
2772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=13#v.LXXVII-p29.1
2773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=13#vi.ix.III-p129.1
2774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=14#v.CXXII-p88.1
2775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=22#v.CXXX-p152.1
2776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=27#v.CVII-p6.1
2777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=27#vi.ix.II-p122.1
2778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=28#v.CXVIII-p47.1
2779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=29#vi.vi.I-p208.1
2780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=29#vi.vi.II-p219.1
2781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=30#vi.vi.II-p270.1
2782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=35#v.CXLVII-p57.1
2783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=2#v.LXVI-p96.1
2784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=4#v.CVIII-p134.1
2785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=5#v.LXXI-p27.1
2786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=10#v.CXXIV-p30.1
2787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=23#v.XIV-p74.1
2788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=41#v.XXXIX-p5.1
2789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=41#v.XLVI-p47.1
2790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=41#v.CXXII-p35.1
2791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=35#vi.viii-p101.1
2792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=35#vi.viii-p84.1
2793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=38#v.CVIII-p4.1
2794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v.XIV-p66.1
2795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=1#v.CXLV-p13.1
2796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.CVIII-p213.1
2797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=31#vi.vi.II-p32.1
2798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=33#v.LVIII-p39.1
2799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=34#v.LIV-p57.1
2800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=24#vi.ix.II-p123.1
2801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=26#vi.vi.I-p218.1
2802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#v.XXII-p39.1
2803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#vi.ix.II-p124.1
2804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=42#vi.ix.I_1-p208.1
2805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=43#vi.ix.II-p125.1
2806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=46#vi.ix.II-p126.1
2807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=47#v.XII-p6.1
2808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=54#v.XXXVIII-p7.1
2809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=62#v.CXXII-p36.1
2810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=28#vi.viii-p147.1
2811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=31#v.CXLVII-p19.1
2812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#v.L-p29.1
2813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vi.ix.III-p124.1
2814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=38#v.LX-p29.1
2815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=42#v.CVII-p7.1
2816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=43#v.XVI-p8.1
2817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=43#v.XXXIX-p7.1
2818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=43#v.CXXV-p4.1
2819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=46#vi.ix.III-p123.1
2820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=5#v.XXXIX-p78.1
2821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=10#vi.v-p72.1
2822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=13#v.CVIII-p56.1
2823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=16#vi.viii-p155.1
2824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=28#v.CVIII-p56.1
2825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=32#v.XVIII-p5.1
2826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=32#v.XXII-p133.1
2827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=32#v.LII-p36.1
2828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=39#v.LXXXIV-p39.1
2829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=39#vi.viii-p102.1
2830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=39#v.CVIII-p295.1
2831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=42#vi.vi.II-p201.1
2832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=42#v.CVIII-p287.1
2833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=50#v.CVIII-p125.1
2834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.LIII-p37.1
2835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.CVIII-p78.1
2836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p221.1
2837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.XXXIX-p36.1
2838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.CVIII-p9.1
2839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p43.1
2840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p292.1
2841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.CVIII-p78.1
2842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.ix.III-p101.1
2843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#v.CVIII-p103.1
2844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#v.LXIX-p11.1
2845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#vi.iv-p74.1
2846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=36#v.CXXI-p3.2
2847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=41#v.CXXII-p5.1
2848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=42#v.CXXII-p6.1
2849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=45#v.CXXII-p5.1
2850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=45#vi.v-p104.1
2851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=47#v.CXXII-p7.1
2852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.LXIX-p75.1
2853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.XLVIII-p88.1
2854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.XLVI-p104.1
2855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.LXIX-p75.1
2856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi.v-p63.1
2857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.CXXV-p150.1
2858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.LXXXIV-p18.1
2859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi.ix.III-p150.1
2860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.LXIX-p77.1
2861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.LVIII-p29.1
2862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=23#v.LXIX-p73.1
2863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=30#vi.iv-p84.1
2864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=31#vi.iv-p82.1
2865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.CXXV-p7.1
2866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.CVIII-p154.1
2867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi.vi.II-p208.1
2868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.XII-p7.1
2869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.LXIX-p76.1
2870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.III-p34.1
2871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.CVIII-p268.1
2872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.XLVIII-p161.1
2873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.CXXIII-p64.1
2874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#v.LVIII-p28.1
2875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=32#vi.vi.II-p199.1
2876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=35#v.LXXVI-p18.1
2877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vi.iv-p69.1
2878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.ix.III-p10.1
2879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.CXXVI-p6.1
2880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.CXXXIII-p83.1
2881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi.viii-p77.1
2882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.LXIX-p12.1
2883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=25#vi.viii-p124.1
2884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=28#vi.ix.I_1-p216.1
2885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=30#vi.ix.II-p128.1
2886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=35#vi.vii-p41.1
2887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=44#v.XXII-p253.1
2888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.XLVIII-p117.1
2889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=15#v.XIV-p61.1
2890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=38#vi.ix.I_1-p207.1
2891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=39#vi.viii-p144.1
2892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#vi.ix.III-p75.1
2893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=51#v.CVIII-p80.1
2894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=56#vi.vi.II-p220.1
2895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=57#vi.vi.II-p293.1
2896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=60#v.XL-p10.1
2897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=66#v.XL-p10.1
2898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=70#vi.ix.III-p45.1
2899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=3#vi.v-p64.1
2900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=5#vi.v-p65.1
2901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=10#vi.ix.II-p129.1
2902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=19#vi.ix.II-p130.1
2903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.CXIII-p8.1
2904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=37#vi.vi.I-p98.1
2905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vi.ix.II-p131.1
2906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=12#v.CXXX-p78.1
2907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=23#v.XCVII-p14.1
2908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#v.XXII-p11.1
2909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#vi.vi.II-p217.1
2910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=48#v.XIV-p107.1
2911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=48#v.XLV-p21.1
2912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=48#v.CVIII-p239.1
2913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=49#v.XLV-p22.1
2914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#v.LIII-p44.1
2915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#v.CVIII-p111.1
2916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=2#v.CXXX-p172.1
2917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=2#v.LXVIII-p4.1
2918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=3#v.LXVIII-p2.1
2919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=21#v.CVII-p40.1
2920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=8#vi.ix.II-p132.1
2921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#v.LXXXII-p25.1
2922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#v.CXXIV-p29.1
2923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=11#v.LX-p7.1
2924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=11#vi.vii-p31.1
2925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=35#v.LX-p45.1
2926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=35#v.XXXIX-p10.1
2927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=35#v.XLVI-p48.1
2928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=38#v.XXXVIII-p13.1
2929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=38#v.XXXVIII-p14.1
2930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=39#v.CXVIII-p9.1
2931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=39#v.CXLVII-p55.1
2932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=43#v.IV-p13.1
2933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=43#v.VII-p18.1
2934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=43#v.CXVIII-p9.1
2935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=43#v.XLVI-p94.1
2936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=44#v.CXVIII-p9.1
2937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=44#v.CXLVII-p55.1
2938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p288.1
2939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vi.viii-p153.1
2940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=2#v.XXXVIII-p15.1
2941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=2#v.LXXI-p28.1
2942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=2#v.CVIII-p289.1
2943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vi.vi.II-p206.1
2944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v.XXXVIII-p16.1
2945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=24#v.LIV-p98.1
2946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=32#v.LV-p34.1
2947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=41#v.XVIII-p3.1
2948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v.XII-p5.1
2949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=10#v.XIV-p98.1
2950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=10#vi.vi.II-p30.1
2951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=15#v.CXXX-p115.1
2952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=20#v.LXXXII-p65.1
2953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#v.CXLVI-p18.1
2954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=25#vi.vi.I-p212.1
2955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=26#v.CXXV-p5.1
2956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=38#v.XLII-p13.1
2957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=2#v.III-p50.1
2958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=2#v.LXXVII-p87.1
2959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=2#vi.vi.II-p222.1
2960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=2#vi.vi.II-p280.1
2961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p282.1
2962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#v.LV-p33.1
2963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#v.CXXII-p29.1
2964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=23#vi.vi.II-p221.1
2965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=27#v.XIII-p9.1
2966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=27#v.LXXXII-p4.1
2967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=27#vi.vi.I-p217.1
2968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#v.XLI-p5.1
2969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#v.CXXIV-p58.1
2970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#v.XXII-p26.1
2971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#vi.ix.I_1-p182.1
2972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=31#v.LVIII-p37.1
2973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#vi.ix.III-p74.1
2974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=18#v.XLV-p17.1
2975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#v.XLIII-p13.1
2976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#v.CVIII-p242.1
2977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#vi.vi.I-p113.1
2978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#v.XLI-p5.1
2979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#vi.vi.I-p351.1
2980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=33#vi.viii-p139.1
2981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=12#vi.ix.II-p133.1
2982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=20#vi.vi.II-p289.1
2983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=20#vi.vi.II-p224.1
2984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=21#v.CXXIV-p48.1
2985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=23#vi.vi.II-p291.1
2986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=15#v.CXXVII-p33.1
2987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=15#v.LXXVII-p19.1
2988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=23#vi.ix.III-p29.1
2989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=28#v.CVIII-p64.1
2990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=6#vi.vi.II-p265.1
2991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=6#vi.vi.II-p331.1
2992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=6#vi.viii-p146.1
2993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=15#vi.vi.II-p331.1
2994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=23#v.XV-p4.1
2995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=23#v.XXII-p159.1
2996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=23#v.XXII-p169.1
2997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=23#v.CXXXIII-p135.1
2998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=25#v.XLVI-p92.1
2999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=25#vi.v-p76.1
3000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=26#v.CXVII-p13.1
3001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=26#v.CXXVII-p34.1
3002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=26#vi.vi.I-p222.1
3003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=34#v.III-p34.1
3004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=34#v.LXIX-p78.1
3005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=37#v.LVII-p46.1
3006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=38#v.CVIII-p52.1
3007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=38#v.XLVI-p51.1
3008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=41#v.XLVIII-p186.1
3009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=0#vi.viii-p156.1
3010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=1#v.CXX-p9.1
3011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=1#v.CXX-p7.2
3012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=4#vi.vi.I-p213.1
3013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=6#v.XLVI-p50.1
3014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=11#vi.ix.I_1-p205.1
3015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=12#v.XLVI-p50.1
3016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#v.XXXIX-p79.1
3017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#v.LIX-p6.1
3018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#v.CXX-p8.2
3019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vi.v-p95.1
3020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=19#v.XLVIII-p185.1
3021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=19#v.XLVIII-p196.1
3022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=19#v.CVIII-p290.1
3023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=19#vi.vi.I-p315.1
3024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=20#vi.vi.I-p314.1
3025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#v.CXX-p12.1
3026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#vi.vi.I-p216.1
3027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=26#v.CVIII-p285.1
3028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#v.XLVIII-p196.1
3029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#v.CVIII-p294.1
3030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#vi.viii-p103.1
3031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=4#v.CVIII-p286.1
3032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p214.1
3033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=7#vi.viii-p157.1
3034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=9#vi.viii-p151.1
3035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=12#vi.viii-p158.1
3036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p201.1
3037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#v.XLII-p14.1
3038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#v.LXXVII-p19.1
3039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#vi.ix.I_1-p150.1
3040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=16#v.XXXVIII-p7.1
3041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=18#v.XVI-p21.1
3042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.XCVII-p8.1
3043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.CXXVII-p21.1
3044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.viii-p149.1
3045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.CXLIV-p28.1
3046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.XLVI-p93.1
3047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.CVIII-p125.1
3048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi.viii-p148.1
3049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.XLVI-p93.1
3050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=13#v.LIII-p95.1
3051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.v-p67.1
3052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.LIII-p95.1
3053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.III-p46.1
3054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.XLI-p6.1
3055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.CVIII-p71.1
3056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=31#vi.viii-p111.1
3057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=38#v.LXIX-p80.1
3058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=40#v.LI-p22.1
3059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=40#vi.viii-p35.1
3060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.XXII-p312.1
3061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.LII-p81.1
3062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.CXXIII-p143.1
3063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=21#v.LXXXIV-p46.1
3064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=34#v.LXXI-p52.1
3065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=34#v.CXXX-p153.1
3066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=37#v.LVIII-p51.1
3067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.XIV-p45.1
3068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.LXVI-p53.1
3069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.CIX-p24.1
3070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.CXVIII-p29.1
3071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.CXXX-p154.1
3072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.LIII-p163.1
3073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=29#v.LXXXVIII-p6.1
3074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=37#v.LXXXIV-p57.1
3075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.CXLVI-p24.1
3076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=1#v.CXLVI-p6.1
3077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=2#v.CXLVI-p26.1
3078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=5#v.CXLVII-p34.1
3079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vi.iv-p184.1
3080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=15#v.LI-p85.1
3081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=15#v.LVII-p79.1
3082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=29#v.CXXV-p56.1
3083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=45#v.XXXIX-p60.1
3084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=55#vi.viii-p131.1
3085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=56#v.CVIII-p17.1
3086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=59#vi.vii-p28.1
3087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=2#v.XXXIX-p53.1
3088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=2#v.CIX-p28.1
3089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v.XVI-p12.1
3090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vi.iv-p182.1
3091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=20#v.XXII-p319.1
3092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=26#vi.iv-p94.1
3093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=26#v.III-p7.1
3094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=27#v.LIII-p51.1
3095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=27#vi.vi.I-p101.1
3096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=27#v.LXIX-p84.1
3097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=27#v.CVIII-p106.1
3098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=30#v.LIII-p52.1
3099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=36#v.XLVI-p100.1
3100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=3#v.XXXVIII-p10.1
3101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.XVI-p11.1
3102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.XXII-p49.1
3103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.LIII-p32.1
3104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.LI-p77.1
3105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.XXXIX-p31.1
3106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.LIII-p15.1
3107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.LVIII-p10.1
3108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.LXXIX-p70.1
3109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.CXXV-p45.1
3110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.CXXX-p128.1
3111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=17#v.LX-p57.1
3112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=17#vi.iv-p76.1
3113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=17#v.LXIX-p83.1
3114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=32#v.CVIII-p51.1
3115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=36#v.CVIII-p50.1
3116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=39#v.CVIII-p321.1
3117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=0#v.LX-p61.1
3118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.LXXI-p8.1
3119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.LXXIX-p14.1
3120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=3#v.CXXV-p15.1
3121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p186.1
3122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=10#vi.vi.II-p207.1
3123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=15#v.XXXV-p4.1
3124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=26#vi.vii-p21.1
3125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=34#v.LXXIX-p16.1
3126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=28#v.XLI-p10.1
3127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vi.viii-p160.1
3128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=8#vi.ix.II-p88.1
3129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.CIX-p25.1
3130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=32#vi.ix.III-p26.1
3131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#v.CVIII-p86.1
3132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#v.XLVI-p44.1
3133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=11#vi.vii-p20.1
3134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=10#vi.ix.II-p21.1
3135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=28#vi.vi.I-p290.1
3136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=39#vi.ix.II-p134.1
3137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p135.1
3138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=16#v.CXXIV-p41.1
3139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=25#v.CIX-p33.1
3140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=22#v.LXX-p11.1
3141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#v.LXX-p10.1
3142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#vi.vi.I-p81.1
3143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=30#vi.ix.II-p137.1
3144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=1#vi.iv-p85.1
3145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=1#v.LXIX-p86.1
3146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=2#vi.iv-p71.1
3147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=16#v.XLVI-p72.1
3148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.LIV-p24.1
3149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=28#v.CXLVI-p10.1
3150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=35#v.LII-p117.1
3151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=5#v.CVIII-p46.1
3152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=8#v.CVIII-p49.1
3153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=9#v.VII-p40.1
3154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=9#v.XLI-p9.1
3155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=9#v.CXXX-p24.1
3156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p352.1
3157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=10#v.XLI-p10.1
3158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=13#v.XIV-p26.1
3159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=21&scrV=13#v.XLVI-p73.1
3160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=2#vi.ix.III-p28.1
3161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=5#vi.viii-p54.1
3162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=17#vi.vii-p51.1
3163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=2#v.LVII-p5.1
3164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=26&scrV=24#v.XXVII-p7.1
3165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=23#vi.vi.II-p257.1
3166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=27&scrV=37#vi.vii-p29.1
3167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=7#v.LXXVII-p67.1
3168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=30#v.LXXI-p12.1
3169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.LXXV-p12.1
3170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.XV-p7.1
3171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.LXIII-p9.1
3172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.LXXXIV-p64.1
3173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.CXXVII-p57.1
3174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.CXXX-p165.1
3175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v.CIX-p7.1
3176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.LXIX-p24.1
3177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.CXLVII-p9.1
3178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi.ix.III-p46.1
3179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi.ix.I_1-p217.1
3180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=24#v.CXXIII-p130.1
3181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=28#v.CVIII-p139.1
3182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p48.1
3183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.XXIII-p11.1
3184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p304.1
3185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.ix.III-p118.1
3186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v.LX-p14.1
3187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.CXXXIII-p107.1
3188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=23#v.CXXXIII-p22.1
3189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=23#vi.ix.II-p257.1
3190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=23#vi.ix.I_1-p113.1
3191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=24#vi.ix.II-p48.1
3192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=28#vi.ix.II-p48.1
3193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=30#vi.ix.II-p48.1
3194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.XXXV-p6.1
3195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.XXII-p384.1
3196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.CVIII-p207.1
3197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.CXXX-p52.1
3198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=7#v.CXXI-p9.1
3199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.XXXIX-p59.1
3200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.LX-p12.1
3201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p7.2
3202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p167.1
3203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.vi.II-p301.1
3204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.ix.III-p145.1
3205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v.XLVI-p42.1
3206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v.LXIX-p7.1
3207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v.LXXVII-p88.1
3208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v.XCVII-p7.1
3209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=3#v.LXIX-p102.1
3210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v.XXII-p368.1
3211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vi.viii-p129.1
3212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vi.viii-p164.1
3213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=11#v.XXXVIII-p18.1
3214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p49.1
3215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=21#vi.vi.I-p320.1
3216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=0#vi.ix.II-p3.1
3217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=1#v.LV-p19.1
3218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.XLVIII-p45.1
3219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.XXXVIII-p20.1
3220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.CXXIII-p26.1
3221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=2#vi.vi.I-p123.1
3222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=4#vi.vi.I-p321.1
3223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=6#v.LXIX-p100.1
3224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=6#vi.vi.I-p266.1
3225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=8#v.CXXI-p10.1
3226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.LIII-p46.1
3227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.LII-p89.1
3228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p322.1
3229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.CXXXIII-p110.1
3230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=18#vi.ix.II-p152.1
3231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=18#v.CXXII-p99.1
3232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=18#v.CXXX-p108.1
3233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v.LXXIX-p72.1
3234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v.CXXX-p108.1
3235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v.CXXXIII-p18.1
3236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v.CXXXIII-p115.1
3237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=22#v.CXXXIII-p108.1
3238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#v.XXII-p52.1
3239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#v.LXXVII-p14.1
3240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#v.LXXIX-p45.1
3241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#v.CXXXIII-p17.1
3242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.XXII-p53.1
3243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.CVIII-p260.1
3244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.CXXII-p98.1
3245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.CXXV-p47.1
3246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.CXXX-p108.1
3247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.CXXXIII-p6.1
3248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vi.vi.I-p322.1
3249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vi.viii-p67.1
3250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vi.vi.I-p322.1
3251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p323.1
3252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#v.CXXXIII-p106.1
3253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p324.1
3254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=8#v.XXXVIII-p24.1
3255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=8#v.CXXX-p109.1
3256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#vi.viii-p106.1
3257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#v.LVIII-p42.1
3258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vi.vi.I-p325.1
3259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vi.viii-p130.1
3260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p325.1
3261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#v.XIV-p51.1
3262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=18#v.XIV-p99.1
3263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=18#v.XXII-p383.1
3264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=18#v.CVIII-p214.1
3265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=18#v.CXXX-p55.1
3266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=19#v.CXXIV-p23.1
3267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=20#v.CXXIV-p32.1
3268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=20#v.CXXIV-p45.1
3269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=21#v.CXXIV-p47.1
3270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#vi.viii-p9.1
3271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#v.LXXVII-p69.1
3272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=35#v.XXII-p369.1
3273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=35#v.CXXX-p53.1
3274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=38#v.XXII-p369.1
3275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=39#v.XXII-p369.1
3276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=3#v.CXXI-p11.1
3277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=3#v.CXXVIII-p36.1
3278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=3#v.LXXXII-p26.1
3279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=3#vi.v-p85.1
3280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=11#v.CXLIV-p20.1
3281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.CXXXIII-p117.1
3282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=14#v.CXX-p13.1
3283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=16#v.LXVI-p52.1
3284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=16#v.LXXXV-p2.1
3285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=16#v.LXXXV-p5.1
3286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=16#vi.ix.II-p50.1
3287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=16#v.CXXX-p143.1
3288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=16#v.CXXXIII-p81.1
3289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=16#vi.ix.I_1-p43.1
3290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=20#vi.ix.I_1-p249.1
3291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=20#v.CXXXIII-p116.1
3292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=21#vi.ix.I_1-p140.1
3293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=22#vi.iv-p175.1
3294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=30#vi.ix.II-p51.1
3295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=33#v.LVII-p73.1
3296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#v.LIV-p38.1
3297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#v.LXXXIV-p56.1
3298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p52.1
3299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#v.CXXIV-p7.1
3300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vi.vii-p36.1
3301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#v.XXXIX-p27.1
3302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=6#v.XXIV-p6.1
3303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=20#v.XXII-p22.1
3304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v.CXXIII-p109.1
3305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=32#v.LXIX-p6.1
3306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=32#v.CXXII-p64.1
3307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=32#v.CXXXIII-p21.1
3308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=32#vi.vi.II-p54.1
3309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=32#vi.ix.I_1-p102.1
3310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#v.XXXIX-p22.1
3311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#vi.viii-p49.1
3312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#v.CVIII-p299.1
3313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#vi.ix.I_1-p246.1
3314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.XIV-p44.1
3315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.LXVI-p93.1
3316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.CXVIII-p41.1
3317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.CXXV-p59.1
3318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.CXXVII-p43.1
3319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#v.CXXX-p6.1
3320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p327.1
3321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p233.1
3322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=9#v.LI-p12.1
3323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.LII-p38.1
3324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=11#v.XXVII-p16.1
3325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v.CXXV-p94.1
3326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=15#v.LX-p68.1
3327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=15#v.CXXII-p42.1
3328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=17#v.CXVII-p18.1
3329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=17#v.CXXIII-p129.1
3330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=18#v.LXXXII-p11.1
3331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=20#vi.ix.I_1-p225.1
3332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=21#v.LXXXIV-p7.1
3333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=21#v.CVIII-p198.1
3334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=11#vi.vi.I-p329.1
3335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=12#v.LX-p39.1
3336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p329.1
3337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=14#vi.vi.II-p93.1
3338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=2#v.XLVI-p15.1
3339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=2#v.LIV-p64.1
3340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=2#vi.vi.II-p195.1
3341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p193.1
3342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.XI-p13.1
3343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.XXII-p343.1
3344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.XLVI-p81.1
3345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.XLV-p4.1
3346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.CXXV-p63.1
3347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=5#v.XLVIII-p139.1
3348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=5#v.CXLIV-p11.1
3349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p196.1
3350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p234.1
3351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=5#vi.vii-p38.1
3352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=6#v.XXII-p344.1
3353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=10#v.XLV-p28.1
3354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=14#vi.vi.II-p194.1
3355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=20#vi.vi.II-p81.1
3356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=21#v.XXII-p76.1
3357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=21#v.LIV-p63.1
3358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=21#v.LXXIX-p77.1
3359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=21#v.CVIII-p13.1
3360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=21#vi.vi.I-p141.1
3361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=19#v.LXXI-p11.1
3362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=24#v.LXXI-p9.1
3363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=18#vi.ix.I_1-p200.1
3364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=20#v.LI-p90.1
3365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=16&scrV=20#v.CXXX-p117.1
3366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p54.1
3367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p55.1
3368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.LIII-p38.1
3369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.CXXXIII-p133.1
3370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.LIII-p39.1
3371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.LIII-p41.1
3372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.LXVI-p13.1
3373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=25#vi.ix.II-p29.1
3374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v.CVIII-p234.1
3375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=25#v.CXXXIII-p134.1
3376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=25#vi.viii-p73.1
3377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=25#vi.ix.I_1-p135.1
3378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.LXVI-p25.1
3379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=27#v.LVII-p62.1
3380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#v.LXVI-p65.1
3381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=31#v.III-p42.1
3382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=31#v.XXII-p255.1
3383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.LIII-p40.1
3384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.LVII-p70.1
3385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.III-p6.1
3386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.XXII-p392.1
3387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.LIX-p3.1
3388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.CVIII-p326.1
3389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.viii-p150.1
3390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.LII-p88.1
3391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi.viii-p72.1
3392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p330.1
3393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.LXIX-p90.1
3394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.CXXXIII-p129.1
3395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.XXII-p47.1
3396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.VII-p26.1
3397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.CXXX-p13.1
3398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vi.vi.II-p235.1
3399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p56.1
3400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p115.1
3401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.vi.II-p236.1
3402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.XLVIII-p14.1
3403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.VI-p16.1
3404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi.vi.II-p223.1
3405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi.ix.III-p11.1
3406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.XIV-p33.1
3407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.LXIX-p33.1
3408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.CVII-p30.1
3409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi.ix.II-p57.1
3410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p237.1
3411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vi.ix.II-p58.1
3412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vi.ix.II-p255.1
3413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.XI-p12.1
3414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p59.1
3415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.CXXXIII-p80.1
3416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.ix.I_1-p206.1
3417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vi.ix.III-p103.1
3418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.CVIII-p232.1
3419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=10#v.CVIII-p233.1
3420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.XVII-p17.1
3421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.CXXIII-p134.1
3422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.CXXV-p73.1
3423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vi.ix.II-p60.1
3424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vi.ix.II-p138.1
3425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=21#v.LXXXII-p6.1
3426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=21#v.CVIII-p252.1
3427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.CXLVII-p5.1
3428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.CXXII-p92.1
3429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.XC-p11.1
3430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.XIV-p68.1
3431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.CIX-p13.1
3432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.CXXVIII-p13.1
3433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=11#vi.v-p97.1
3434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#v.LXIX-p34.1
3435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.XLVIII-p76.1
3436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.XLVIII-p163.1
3437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.LIV-p81.1
3438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.CXXIII-p66.1
3439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vi.vi.I-p128.1
3440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.XXII-p92.1
3441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.LV-p14.1
3442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p4.1
3443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p97.1
3444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.LV-p13.1
3445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=15#v.LI-p28.1
3446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.LV-p16.1
3447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.LXXVII-p11.1
3448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.CXXII-p111.1
3449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.CXXIII-p95.1
3450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vi.vi.I-p92.1
3451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v.LIV-p56.1
3452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v.LV-p2.1
3453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=18#v.LV-p11.1
3454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#v.LI-p28.1
3455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vi.vi.II-p223.1
3456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vi.vi.II-p286.1
3457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v.XLVIII-p127.1
3458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.XLIX-p7.1
3459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p6.1
3460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#v.XLVIII-p27.1
3461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#v.CVII-p79.1
3462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p63.1
3463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=1#v.XLVIII-p106.1
3464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=3#v.XXII-p200.1
3465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=3#v.XLVIII-p29.1
3466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=4#v.XLVIII-p24.1
3467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=4#v.CVII-p81.1
3468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=5#v.XLVIII-p133.1
3469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=5#v.XLVIII-p147.1
3470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=5#v.CXXII-p107.1
3471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p95.1
3472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p42.1
3473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=6#v.XLVIII-p148.1
3474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v.XLIX-p10.1
3475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v.XLVIII-p31.1
3476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p71.1
3477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p295.1
3478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p312.1
3479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=7#v.XXII-p173.1
3480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=8#v.XLVIII-p152.1
3481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=8#vi.vi.I-p78.1
3482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=8#v.XLVIII-p150.1
3483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=8#v.CXXIII-p22.1
3484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=8#v.CXXIII-p41.1
3485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=8#v.XLVIII-p43.1
3486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=9#v.XLVIII-p70.1
3487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=9#v.XXII-p273.1
3488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=9#v.LXXVII-p13.1
3489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=9#v.LXXIX-p104.1
3490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p83.1
3491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.LXXVII-p10.1
3492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=13#v.CVII-p4.1
3493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.LXXXV-p2.2
3494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.LXXXV-p6.1
3495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=15#v.XLVIII-p50.1
3496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=18#v.XLVIII-p48.1
3497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=18#v.CXXVIII-p17.1
3498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=18#vi.vi.I-p89.1
3499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=19#v.XLVIII-p51.1
3500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=20#v.CVII-p82.1
3501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=21#v.XLVIII-p54.1
3502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=21#v.XLVIII-p58.1
3503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=21#v.CXXVIII-p23.1
3504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=23#v.XLVIII-p127.1
3505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.CXXVIII-p16.1
3506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=25#v.XXII-p172.1
3507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=25#v.XLVIII-p56.1
3508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=25#v.CXXX-p129.1
3509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vi.v-p120.1
3510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vi.vi.I-p289.1
3511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vi.vi.I-p308.1
3512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vi.vi.I-p94.1
3513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=26#v.XXII-p187.1
3514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=26#vi.vi.I-p102.1
3515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=27#v.CXLV-p5.1
3516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=27#vi.vi.I-p104.1
3517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=28#v.XXII-p201.1
3518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#v.XXII-p188.1
3519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#v.LII-p118.1
3520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#v.CXXIII-p31.1
3521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#v.CXXIII-p89.1
3522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#vi.v-p112.1
3523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#vi.vi.I-p60.1
3524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#vi.vi.I-p195.1
3525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#vi.vi.I-p247.1
3526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=30#vi.vi.I-p106.1
3527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=32#vi.v-p113.1
3528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=32#v.XXII-p196.1
3529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=34#v.XXII-p350.1
3530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=34#v.LXXIX-p79.1
3531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=34#vi.v-p114.1
3532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=34#vi.v-p119.1
3533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=35#iv.III-p17.1
3534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=35#v.XLVIII-p61.1
3535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=35#v.XLVIII-p62.2
3536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=35#vi.vi.I-p114.1
3537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=37#vi.vi.I-p116.1
3538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=39#v.XLVIII-p46.1
3539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=39#v.LV-p20.1
3540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=39#vi.vi.I-p58.1
3541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=39#vi.vi.I-p85.1
3542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=39#v.CXXIII-p26.1
3543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=39#vi.vi.I-p120.1
3544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=40#v.XLVIII-p73.1
3545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=40#vi.vi.I-p122.1
3546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=10#v.XXII-p281.1
3547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=13#v.CXXIII-p135.1
3548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vi.v-p69.1
3549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v.XXII-p174.1
3550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v.XLVII-p7.1
3551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v.CXVIII-p37.1
3552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=5#v.CXXIII-p131.1
3553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p209.1
3554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.LXVI-p54.1
3555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=11#v.CVIII-p249.1
3556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=11#v.CXXV-p74.1
3557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.LII-p46.1
3558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.LXVI-p56.1
3559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p238.1
3560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.XIV-p64.1
3561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=14#v.CXXIII-p133.1
3562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=14#v.CXXV-p72.1
3563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=19#v.LXXXII-p60.1
3564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=24#v.LXXI-p25.1
3565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=24#vi.ix.III-p8.1
3566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=26#v.CIX-p41.1
3567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#v.XXII-p51.1
3568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#v.LIV-p51.1
3569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#v.LXXIX-p73.1
3570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#v.CVIII-p12.1
3571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#v.CXXV-p46.1
3572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#v.CXXX-p107.1
3573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#vi.vi.II-p34.1
3574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v.XXII-p69.1
3575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#vi.vi.I-p159.2
3576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=10#v.LI-p89.1
3577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=11#v.LII-p79.1
3578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=11#v.CXXIII-p88.1
3579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=11#vi.vi.II-p61.1
3580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=12#v.XI-p14.1
3581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p39.1
3582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.XLV-p24.1
3583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p38.1
3584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=21#v.XXII-p284.1
3585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=21#v.LV-p25.1
3586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=29#v.CXXIII-p132.1
3587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=31#v.CXXVII-p19.1
3588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=31#v.CXXXIII-p92.1
3589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=5#v.CXLVII-p41.1
3590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=6#vi.ix.III-p53.1
3591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.LI-p78.1
3592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=14#v.XXII-p265.1
3593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=16#vi.iv-p199.1
3594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=27#v.XIV-p76.1
3595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vi.vi.II-p262.1
3596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vi.ix.I_1-p262.2
3597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=28#v.XIV-p79.1
3598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=28#v.XLVIII-p143.1
3599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vi.iv-p53.1
3600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.XLVIII-p33.1
3601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p240.1
3602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#vi.ix.I_1-p168.1
3603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#vi.ix.I_1-p139.1
3604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p241.1
3605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#v.LII-p76.1
3606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=21#vi.ix.I_1-p139.1
3607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=22#vi.vi.II-p297.1
3608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=28#v.XLI-p11.1
3609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=28#vi.vi.II-p242.1
3610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=29#vi.ix.I_1-p139.1
3611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.LX-p136.1
3612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.LXXXII-p61.1
3613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=5#v.XLVII-p5.1
3614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=7#v.VII-p31.1
3615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=7#v.XVII-p6.1
3616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=7#v.LX-p136.1
3617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=8#v.LX-p136.1
3618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vi.vi.II-p243.1
3619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=9#v.XLI-p25.1
3620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=9#vi.viii-p43.1
3621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=9#vi.ix.I_1-p129.1
3622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=9#vi.ix.III-p96.1
3623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#v.XLI-p25.1
3624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#vi.ix.I_1-p130.1
3625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=13#v.LXXXII-p62.1
3626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=18#vi.vi.II-p244.1
3627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p244.1
3628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p245.1
3629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=15#v.XXII-p144.1
3630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=15#v.CXXV-p100.1
3631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=16#v.LXXXII-p14.1
3632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=18#vi.vi.II-p246.1
3633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=19#v.LIII-p83.1
3634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=30#v.LII-p69.1
3635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=8#v.XLVII-p15.1
3636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vi.ix.II-p220.1
3637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vi.ix.II-p62.1
3638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vi.vi.II-p247.1
3639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#v.LVIII-p11.1
3640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vi.vi.II-p248.1
3641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=23#vi.v-p34.1
3642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=25#v.LV-p2.1
3643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=25#v.LV-p30.1
3644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#vi.ix.I_1-p148.1
3645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=31#v.LX-p87.1
3646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=31#v.CXXVII-p38.1
3647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=33#v.XXII-p275.1
3648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=33#v.LII-p52.1
3649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=33#v.LXX-p9.1
3650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=33#v.CXXX-p183.1
3651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=33#vi.vi.I-p80.1
3652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=35#vi.viii-p91.1
3653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=37#vi.viii-p91.1
3654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=39#vi.vi.II-p249.1
3655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=40#v.LXXXIV-p35.1
3656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=41#v.III-p51.1
3657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=41#vi.vi.II-p5.1
3658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=42#vi.viii-p92.1
3659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=44#v.CVIII-p279.1
3660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=44#vi.vi.I-p331.1
3661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=44#vi.viii-p83.1
3662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=44#vi.viii-p92.1
3663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=44#vi.viii-p101.1
3664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=47#vi.vi.I-p332.1
3665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=50#vi.viii-p165.1
3666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=50#vi.viii-p166.1
3667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=50#vi.ix.II-p213.2
3668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=51#v.CXIX-p2.1
3669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=53#v.XIV-p101.1
3670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=53#v.LXXV-p20.1
3671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=53#vi.viii-p94.1
3672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=53#vi.viii-p108.1
3673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=53#v.CXXIV-p25.1
3674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=54#v.CVIII-p220.1
3675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=54#vi.viii-p167.1
3676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=55#vi.viii-p168.1
3677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=58#vi.viii-p88.1
3678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=85#vi.vi.II-p96.1
3679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.CVIII-p221.1
3680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p222.1
3681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.CVIII-p241.1
3682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.CXXII-p14.1
3683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.XLVIII-p34.1
3684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.CXXII-p93.1
3685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.CXXV-p87.1
3686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p72.1
3687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p73.1
3688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.XLVIII-p35.1
3689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.XLVIII-p37.1
3690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p74.1
3691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi.vi.II-p37.1
3692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.XXII-p270.1
3693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi.vi.I-p250.1
3694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#v.CXX-p14.1
3695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vi.ix.III-p68.1
3696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.IX-p6.1
3697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.XXXI-p13.1
3698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.ix.II-p63.1
3699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.ix.III-p69.1
3700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p113.1
3701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.LII-p15.1
3702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.CIX-p5.1
3703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.LI-p83.1
3704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p252.1
3705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.ix.I_1-p127.1
3706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=11#vi.ix.I_1-p128.1
3707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.LVIII-p79.1
3708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.LI-p82.1
3709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.XXXVIII-p26.1
3710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi.viii-p14.1
3711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.XI-p18.1
3712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.XXII-p32.1
3713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.XXIII-p9.1
3714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p219.1
3715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.ix.III-p70.1
3716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.CVIII-p208.1
3717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.CXXIV-p60.1
3718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#vi.vi.II-p91.1
3719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.CVIII-p210.1
3720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.XXIII-p26.1
3721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p333.1
3722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.XXXIX-p33.1
3723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.XXXIX-p34.1
3724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.CVIII-p5.1
3725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vi.vi.II-p251.1
3726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.LXXXII-p49.1
3727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi.vi.I-p319.1
3728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.LII-p104.1
3729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.XLV-p26.1
3730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.XLV-p23.1
3731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.LIII-p161.1
3732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.CXXIII-p142.1
3733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.XI-p5.1
3734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p84.1
3735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.XXII-p279.1
3736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.LV-p26.1
3737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.LXXI-p44.1
3738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.iv-p61.1
3739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.vi.II-p16.1
3740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.CXXIII-p27.1
3741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.LVIII-p41.1
3742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=12#v.CXLV-p12.1
3743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=13#v.CVIII-p176.1
3744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=14#v.LXXI-p50.1
3745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=14#v.LXXIX-p38.1
3746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vi.vii-p54.1
3747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=18#v.LIII-p155.1
3748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi.vi.II-p252.1
3749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=3#v.LX-p21.1
3750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v.LIII-p22.1
3751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=8#v.LI-p18.1
3752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=12#v.CXLIV-p15.1
3753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v.LI-p11.1
3754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=14#v.LXIX-p111.1
3755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vi.ix.III-p71.1
3756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.LXIX-p47.1
3757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.CXXV-p143.1
3758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.CXXX-p8.1
3759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#vi.vi.I-p334.1
3760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p36.1
3761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=6#v.LIII-p36.1
3762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=14#v.XV-p37.1
3763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=14#v.CXLVII-p76.1
3764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=23#v.XXII-p385.1
3765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=27#v.CIX-p35.1
3766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vi.vi.II-p187.1
3767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#v.LI-p53.1
3768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vii.iii.xiii-p10.1
3769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.LI-p53.1
3770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#v.CXLIV-p26.1
3771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.XXII-p297.1
3772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p194.1
3773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#vi.vi.II-p35.1
3774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=8#v.XXXIX-p28.1
3775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#v.III-p43.1
3776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v.III-p43.1
3777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v.XVI-p13.1
3778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v.XXII-p297.1
3779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=10#v.CVIII-p218.1
3780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#vi.ix.III-p72.1
3781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=14#v.CXXIII-p134.1
3782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=14#vi.vi.II-p90.1
3783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=21#v.CXLVII-p6.1
3784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vi.viii-p181.1
3785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#v.LIII-p17.1
3786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#v.LXXIX-p71.1
3787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.LXXXIV-p63.1
3788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#v.XCV-p7.1
3789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.viii-p37.1
3790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.XXII-p256.1
3791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.XXXI-p22.1
3792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.LII-p103.1
3793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.LXVI-p39.1
3794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.XXII-p50.1
3795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.viii-p105.1
3796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.LIII-p18.1
3797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.v-p77.1
3798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vi.v-p68.1
3799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.III-p49.1
3800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iv.V-p8.1
3801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.LIII-p19.1
3802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=2#v.XXXII-p7.1
3803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vi.v-p68.1
3804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.v-p78.1
3805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.LXXIX-p65.1
3806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.CXXVII-p71.1
3807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vi.ix.II-p47.1
3808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vi.ix.II-p64.1
3809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vi.vi.I-p335.1
3810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.XXII-p137.1
3811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vi.ix.II-p65.1
3812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p337.1
3813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.ix.II-p66.1
3814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.LV-p32.1
3815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vi.ix.II-p66.1
3816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vi.ix.II-p258.1
3817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=24#vi.ix.II-p67.1
3818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=27#v.XV-p8.1
3819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=27#v.XXXIX-p63.1
3820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=28#v.LXXV-p19.1
3821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.XL-p9.1
3822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.CXLVII-p46.1
3823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=16#vi.ix.I_1-p201.1
3824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#v.LXIX-p89.1
3825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=19#vi.vi.II-p296.1
3826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=22#v.CXXIII-p102.1
3827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.LIII-p87.1
3828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.XXII-p225.1
3829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.LVIII-p25.1
3830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.LXXXIV-p68.1
3831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=4#vi.ix.II-p68.1
3832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vi.vi.II-p40.1
3833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.LXXXI-p14.1
3834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.LXXXII-p66.1
3835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.CXXV-p19.1
3836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vi.vi.I-p338.1
3837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vi.vi.II-p43.1
3838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.XLVIII-p182.1
3839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.XXII-p33.1
3840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.CXXXIII-p114.1
3841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vi.ix.II-p39.1
3842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vi.vi.I-p91.1
3843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.LXXIX-p91.1
3844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=24#v.XXII-p368.1
3845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=24#vi.vi.I-p340.1
3846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=2#v.XI-p15.1
3847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=7#v.CXXV-p129.1
3848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p341.1
3849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.LIV-p78.1
3850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.LXXXIV-p25.1
3851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.CXXX-p157.1
3852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vi.vii-p56.1
3853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.XVII-p24.1
3854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.XXII-p257.1
3855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=15#v.LXIX-p97.1
3856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#v.XXIV-p9.1
3857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p139.1
3858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.CIX-p6.1
3859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vi.viii-p66.1
3860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.XC-p6.1
3861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p342.1
3862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.CXXXIII-p122.1
3863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.CXXIII-p106.1
3864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.vi.II-p253.1
3865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.III-p5.1
3866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.vi.II-p254.1
3867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.XLI-p11.1
3868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.CVIII-p301.1
3869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.CXXX-p180.1
3870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.CXXXIII-p61.1
3871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=22#v.LXIX-p99.1
3872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=22#vi.vi.I-p343.1
3873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.XIII-p5.1
3874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.LXXIX-p100.1
3875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#vi.ix.II-p25.1
3876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.CXXX-p148.1
3877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.XIV-p38.1
3878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.CXXX-p150.1
3879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.XXXIX-p37.1
3880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.CXXVIII-p26.1
3881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.XLVI-p30.1
3882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.LX-p16.1
3883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=18#v.XXII-p75.1
3884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=18#v.CVIII-p119.1
3885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=18#v.LIV-p58.1
3886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=18#v.LXXIX-p78.1
3887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=18#v.CVII-p56.1
3888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.CXXV-p101.1
3889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=22#v.CXXVII-p13.1
3890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.XLVIII-p78.1
3891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#vi.vi.I-p132.1
3892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=27#v.XC-p7.1
3893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=27#v.CXXV-p142.1
3894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=27#vi.vi.I-p257.1
3895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=31#vi.vi.I-p130.1
3896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=31#v.XXII-p14.1
3897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=31#v.CXXIII-p72.1
3898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=32#vi.vi.I-p131.1
3899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=1#v.XIV-p22.1
3900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v.LXXXII-p27.1
3901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.XLVIII-p128.1
3902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.XXII-p25.1
3903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.LXXVII-p79.1
3904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vi.ix.II-p38.1
3905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.CXXIV-p56.1
3906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p44.1
3907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.III-p35.1
3908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=14#v.CXXX-p32.1
3909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.III-p45.1
3910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.XXII-p131.1
3911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.LIV-p46.1
3912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#v.CXXX-p123.1
3913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=24#vi.vi.I-p344.1
3914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.CXLVI-p8.1
3915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=21#v.LX-p47.1
3916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.III-p44.1
3917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.XXII-p129.1
3918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.LX-p46.1
3919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.CVIII-p11.1
3920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.vi.I-p426.1
3921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.vi.II-p92.1
3922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p183.1
3923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi.vi.I-p313.1
3924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p199.1
3925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vi.ix.II-p70.1
3926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.CXXXIII-p82.1
3927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.LXIX-p39.1
3928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi.ix.III-p105.1
3929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.LXIX-p49.1
3930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vi.ix.II-p96.1
3931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=27#v.LX-p49.1
3932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=44#v.LXIX-p49.1
3933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.XXII-p367.1
3934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v.CXXXIII-p88.1
3935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vi.ix.I_1-p119.1
3936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.LXXI-p33.1
3937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.LXXIX-p113.1
3938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.CXXV-p112.1
3939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p314.1
3940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.XLVIII-p123.1
3941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.XIV-p32.1
3942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.VII-p35.1
3943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.XXII-p93.1
3944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.CXXIII-p180.1
3945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.CXLVII-p8.1
3946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.XIV-p14.1
3947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.XVI-p22.1
3948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.LVIII-p26.1
3949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.LX-p22.1
3950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi.vi.I-p345.1
3951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vi.viii-p93.1
3952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.CXXV-p92.1
3953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vi.vi.I-p346.1
3954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.LXXVII-p31.1
3955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.XLVIII-p111.1
3956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.viii-p81.1
3957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vi.viii-p98.1
3958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=26#vi.viii-p48.1
3959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.V-p4.1
3960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.XLIV-p4.1
3961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vi.vi.I-p347.1
3962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vi.viii-p99.1
3963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=13#v.LXIX-p103.1
3964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.XXII-p358.1
3965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=18#v.CXXI-p12.1
3966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p347.1
3967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.XXII-p307.1
3968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.XXII-p136.1
3969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.XIV-p40.1
3970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p132.1
3971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.LXXXII-p64.1
3972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.CIX-p34.1
3973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.CXXV-p9.1
3974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.LIII-p155.1
3975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.CXXIII-p134.1
3976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.CXXV-p73.1
3977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=18#vi.vi.II-p41.1
3978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.CVIII-p215.1
3979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.CXXVIII-p20.1
3980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p133.1
3981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.LIII-p33.1
3982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.III-p23.1
3983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.XXXIX-p43.1
3984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.LX-p5.1
3985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.LXXV-p10.1
3986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi.vii-p32.1
3987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=15#v.LIX-p5.1
3988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=16#v.XIV-p103.1
3989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.III-p33.1
3990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.LIX-p5.1
3991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.CXIX-p2.2
3992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.LXXXIV-p6.1
3993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.XXII-p199.1
3994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.XXII-p340.1
3995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.XLVIII-p132.1
3996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.CXXV-p70.1
3997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi.ix.i-p14.2
3998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.LXI-p4.1
3999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.LXII-p5.1
4000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=21#v.LXXXIV-p44.1
4001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.XLVIII-p157.1
4002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.CXX-p15.1
4003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.CXXI-p13.1
4004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.CXXXIII-p73.1
4005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi.ix.i-p24.1
4006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.CXXIII-p149.1
4007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi.ix.II-p71.1
4008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.XVII-p19.1
4009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.XXIV-p14.1
4010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.ii-p13.1
4011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.XXVII-p19.1
4012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi.ix.III-p100.1
4013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.XCI-p6.1
4014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.XXII-p348.1
4015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.CXVIII-p38.1
4016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vi.vi.I-p225.1
4017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.XXXI-p12.1
4018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=12#v.CXXVII-p47.1
4019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vi.vi.I-p224.1
4020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p59.1
4021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.LXXIX-p67.1
4022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.CVII-p34.1
4023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi.vi.I-p224.1
4024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.XIV-p70.1
4025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p296.1
4026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.LXIX-p21.1
4027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.LXIX-p106.1
4028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.LII-p119.1
4029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.LXIX-p16.1
4030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.vi.I-p183.1
4031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.vi.I-p293.1
4032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ix.I_1-p176.1
4033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.XIV-p71.1
4034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.LII-p95.1
4035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.LXIX-p40.1
4036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.CVII-p33.1
4037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.vi.I-p293.1
4038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.LXXVI-p5.1
4039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.XIV-p72.1
4040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=11#vi.vi.I-p304.1
4041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vi.vi.I-p125.1
4042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.XIV-p75.1
4043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.XXII-p116.1
4044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.XLVIII-p12.1
4045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p82.1
4046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vi.vi.II-p190.1
4047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.XLVIII-p110.1
4048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.XXII-p283.1
4049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.LIV-p53.1
4050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.LXXIX-p76.1
4051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p81.1
4052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.LXXIX-p64.1
4053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.LXXXII-p50.1
4054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.LIII-p24.1
4055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.CXLVI-p13.1
4056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.LX-p69.1
4057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=2#v.CXXIII-p128.1
4058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.LXXIX-p66.1
4059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.CXXIII-p32.1
4060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.LIV-p45.1
4061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.CXXIII-p14.1
4062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.XXII-p73.1
4063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.LIV-p48.1
4064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.LXIX-p115.1
4065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.LXXIX-p69.1
4066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vi.vi.II-p121.1
4067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.CXXIII-p30.1
4068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p126.1
4069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.LXXIX-p62.1
4070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.CXXIII-p13.1
4071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=11#v.LIV-p90.1
4072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=11#v.CXXIII-p127.1
4073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=11#vi.vi.I-p121.1
4074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=11#v.XLVIII-p71.1
4075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=11#v.XXII-p276.1
4076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=11#v.LXXIX-p112.1
4077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=11#v.CXXIII-p15.1
4078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.CXXIII-p179.1
4079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.XLI-p14.1
4080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.LXXVII-p15.1
4081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p56.1
4082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.LXXIX-p106.1
4083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.CXXIII-p12.1
4084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.CXXIII-p17.1
4085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.vi.I-p124.1
4086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.XLVIII-p72.1
4087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.LIV-p90.1
4088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=15#v.LXXVII-p16.1
4089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=15#vi.vi.I-p121.1
4090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=16#v.CXXIII-p32.1
4091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=17#v.CXXIII-p33.1
4092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=18#v.LXVI-p55.1
4093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.XXVII-p18.1
4094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.CXXV-p136.1
4095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=22#v.LXXIX-p68.1
4096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.XXII-p74.1
4097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.LIV-p62.1
4098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.CVII-p57.1
4099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.CXXVII-p23.1
4100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=23#vi.vi.II-p188.1
4101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=24#v.IV-p4.1
4102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=24#v.LIV-p50.1
4103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=7#v.XXII-p300.1
4104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.XXII-p313.1
4105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.LII-p47.1
4106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.LIII-p162.1
4107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.LXVI-p57.1
4108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.LXIX-p122.1
4109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.LXXIX-p39.1
4110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.CVIII-p253.1
4111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#v.CXXV-p109.1
4112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.III-p41.1
4113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.LXXIX-p34.1
4114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.XXII-p306.1
4115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.CXXV-p18.1
4116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=15#v.CXXXIX-p7.1
4117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vi.ix.II-p44.1
4118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vi.ix.III-p100.1
4119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=17#v.LXXIX-p24.1
4120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=20#vi.ix.II-p72.1
4121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.XXII-p348.1
4122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi.vi.I-p348.1
4123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.XV-p17.1
4124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.XLVIII-p13.1
4125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.CXXIII-p59.1
4126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.CXXIV-p36.1
4127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vi.iv-p170.1
4128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=20#v.XLVIII-p90.1
4129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vi.iv-p175.1
4130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vi.vi.I-p379.1
4131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.CXXIV-p38.1
4132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=23#vi.ix.I_1-p247.1
4133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.XXII-p266.1
4134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.LXXV-p27.1
4135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.CXXXIII-p61.1
4136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.CXXX-p181.1
4137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.LII-p62.1
4138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.LIII-p23.1
4139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.CXXVII-p46.1
4140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#v.CXXXIII-p62.1
4141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.XXII-p386.1
4142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.CVIII-p263.1
4143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.ix.I_1-p138.1
4144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi.ix.III-p27.1
4145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vi.ix.III-p30.1
4146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.ix.I_1-p177.1
4147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.CXLVI-p12.1
4148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.LXIX-p22.1
4149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.LXIX-p107.1
4150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.vi.I-p293.1
4151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.LXIX-p123.1
4152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vi.iv-p52.1
4153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.LIII-p25.1
4154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.LII-p62.1
4155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.LXIX-p113.1
4156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.LXX-p8.1
4157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vi.vi.I-p79.1
4158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.XXII-p282.1
4159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.XXII-p115.1
4160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vi.vi.I-p349.1
4161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.LXXXVII-p5.1
4162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.ix.II-p73.1
4163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vi.ix.III-p140.1
4164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=10#v.CXXXVI-p5.1
4165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.LXXXII-p37.1
4166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.VII-p6.1
4167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Phlm&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.LI-p61.1
4168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=3#v.XV-p29.2
4169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p236.1
4170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p236.3
4171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.CXXXIII-p29.1
4172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=10#v.XLVIII-p195.1
4173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vi.vi.II-p3.2
4174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p45.1
4175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vi.vi.II-p48.1
4176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p186.1
4177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=3#v.XLVI-p49.1
4178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vi.vi.II-p323.1
4179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=8#v.CXXV-p151.1
4180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=17#v.CXVIII-p44.1
4181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=32#v.LX-p52.1
4182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=32#v.CXVIII-p45.1
4183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#v.XXII-p376.1
4184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#v.LXIII-p8.1
4185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#v.LXVIII-p12.1
4186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#v.CXVIII-p42.1
4187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#v.CXXV-p138.1
4188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#vi.ix.I_1-p214.1
4189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#v.LXVI-p65.1
4190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#v.CXXX-p133.1
4191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=18#v.LXXXII-p7.1
4192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=0#vi.vi.I-p29.1
4193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.XXII-p19.1
4194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.XLVIII-p15.1
4195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.LXVI-p14.1
4196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.LXIX-p32.1
4197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.LXXIX-p105.1
4198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p140.1
4199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vi.vi.I-p57.1
4200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vi.vi.II-p49.1
4201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.vi.I-p355.1
4202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.CVIII-p304.1
4203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.LXXIX-p102.1
4204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vi.ix.II-p23.1
4205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vi.vi.II-p52.1
4206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.LXIX-p131.1
4207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi.ix.II-p139.1
4208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.CXXXII-p2.1
4209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi.vi.II-p53.1
4210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi.ix.I_1-p158.1
4211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=11#v.LXIX-p130.1
4212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.XLVIII-p52.1
4213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.LXXIX-p6.1
4214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.CXXII-p10.1
4215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=25#v.XXII-p363.1
4216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=26#vi.vi.II-p20.1
4217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.L-p13.1
4218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.LVII-p52.1
4219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p95.1
4220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p118.1
4221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p140.1
4222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.vi.II-p23.1
4223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ix.III-p121.1
4224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.CXXVII-p61.1
4225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=6#v.CXXX-p121.1
4226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.LI-p65.1
4227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vi.ix.II-p141.1
4228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.LI-p76.1
4229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p143.1
4230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.LXXVI-p6.1
4231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi.ix.II-p197.1
4232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vi.ix.II-p22.1
4233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.CXXXIII-p93.1
4234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.LXIX-p14.1
4235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p358.1
4236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vi.vi.I-p359.1
4237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.CXVIII-p46.1
4238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.vi.I-p360.1
4239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vi.vi.I-p361.1
4240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.LX-p83.1
4241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=8#v.LVII-p75.1
4242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.XXXIX-p64.1
4243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.iv-p45.1
4244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p363.1
4245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#vi.ix.II-p36.1
4246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.CXXX-p115.1
4247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=22#v.LIV-p22.1
4248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=22#v.CXXXIII-p104.1
4249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.vi.II-p22.1
4250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.ix.I_1-p181.1
4251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.L-p28.1
4252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.LXIX-p119.1
4253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.vi.I-p68.1
4254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.LIV-p18.1
4255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.XLVIII-p41.1
4256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.XLVIII-p134.1
4257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.CXXVIII-p25.1
4258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p67.1
4259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p76.1
4260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.LII-p63.1
4261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vi.viii-p24.1
4262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi.iv-p169.1
4263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi.vi.I-p137.1
4264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.XXII-p362.1
4265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.CXXIII-p78.1
4266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p364.1
4267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vi.ix.II-p40.1
4268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=10#v.XLVIII-p41.1
4269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi.vi.I-p76.1
4270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.LI-p81.1
4271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.CXLVI-p15.1
4272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.LII-p68.1
4273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.XII-p12.1
4274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.CXXX-p142.1
4275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.CXXX-p141.1
4276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.XIV-p30.1
4277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.XXII-p34.1
4278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.XXXVIII-p29.1
4279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.vi.I-p365.1
4280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p290.1
4281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.XXIII-p14.1
4282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=7#v.XLVII-p11.1
4283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.vi.I-p366.1
4284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.vi.II-p55.1
4285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#vi.vi.II-p56.1
4286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p367.1
4287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#v.CXVIII-p38.1
4288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.ix.II-p43.1
4289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p45.1
4290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.vi.II-p13.1
4291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.ix.I_1-p98.1
4292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.ix.I_1-p235.1
4293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vi.ix.I_1-p99.1
4294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p15.1
4295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p28.1
4296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi.vi.II-p18.1
4297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.XIV-p57.1
4298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.LIV-p12.1
4299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi.vi.I-p70.1
4300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi.vi.I-p371.1
4301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.CVIII-p228.1
4302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vi.iv-p176.1
4303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=27#v.XXXIX-p69.1
4304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.LI-p80.1
4305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.ix.III-p106.1
4306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.vi.I-p372.1
4307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.XXII-p12.1
4308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#vi.vi.II-p9.1
4309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.XIII-p4.1
4310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vi.iv-p181.1
4311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.vi.I-p373.1
4312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi.vi.II-p294.1
4313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vi.vi.II-p294.1
4314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.LXXXII-p19.1
4315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.CXXX-p31.1
4316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#v.CXXXIII-p86.1
4317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vi.ix.II-p19.1
4318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vi.vi.II-p299.1
4319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vi.vi.II-p10.1
4320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vi.ix.I_1-p96.1
4321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.LV-p8.1
4322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.CVIII-p7.1
4323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vi.ix.II-p109.1
4324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vi.vi.II-p12.1
4325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vi.vi.II-p19.1
4326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.CXXIII-p77.1
4327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.CXLVI-p19.1
4328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.LXXXIX-p5.1
4329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=3John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.CXLVI-p20.1
4330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.XLVI-p63.1
4331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p159.1
4332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.XLVI-p64.1
4333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.viii-p63.1
4334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.XLVI-p65.1
4335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.LVII-p10.1
4336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.vi.I-p374.1
4337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vi.ix.I_1-p186.1
4338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.III-p10.1
4339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p357.1
4340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.iv-p44.1
4341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=7#v.XIV-p8.1
4342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vi.vi.I-p140.1
4343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.III-p36.1
4344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.III-p46.2
4345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.X-p13.1
4346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=15#v.XLVI-p87.1
4347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.XIV-p9.1
4348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vi.vi.II-p58.1
4349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi.iv-p194.1
4350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=5#v.XIV-p90.1
4351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.XIV-p78.1
4352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=6#v.CXLVII-p35.1
4353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi.iv-p184.1
4354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.III-p21.1
4355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.III-p44.1
4356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.LXXXIV-p19.1
4357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.CXXIII-p75.1
4358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=10#v.CXXVI-p2.2
4359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.III-p38.1
4360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.III-p17.2
4361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi.iv-p194.2
4362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.CXLVII-p35.1
4363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi.iv-p184.1
4364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi.iv-p194.3
4365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vi.iv-p195.1
4366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=17#v.LXIX-p101.1
4367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vi.iv-p194.4
4368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.III-p46.1
4369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv.III-p43.1
4370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=2&scrV=27#v.XV-p18.1
4371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.III-p45.2
4372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=4#v.LXXVII-p83.1
4373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.LIII-p50.1
4374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=7#v.LVIII-p82.1
4375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.XXXI-p21.1
4376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=16#v.LIV-p42.1
4377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.CXLVII-p52.1
4378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.III-p48.1
4379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.XXII-p246.1
4380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iv.III-p19.1
4381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=33#iv.III-p45.1
4382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=33#iv.III-p46.1
4383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=1#v.LIII-p48.1
4384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vi.vii-p26.1
4385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=5#vi.vi.I-p376.1
4386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.VII-p17.1
4387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.CXXVIII-p9.1
4388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.XLVI-p55.1
4389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.XLVI-p54.1
4390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=11&scrV=7#v.XLVI-p56.1
4391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=9#v.LXXXVIII-p4.1
4392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=1#v.XLVIII-p121.1
4393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi.vi.I-p375.1
4394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=1#v.XXII-p402.1
4395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=3#v.XLVIII-p85.1
4396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=3#v.LXIX-p98.1
4397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=3#vi.vi.I-p377.1
4398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.III-p49.1
4399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.XLVIII-p86.1
4400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.XLVIII-p121.1
4401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.LXXVII-p84.1
4402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.CVIII-p264.1
4403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=4#v.CXXX-p87.1
4404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vi.vii-p24.1
4405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vi.viii-p143.1
4406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=14&scrV=6#v.CXXIV-p54.1
4407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=0#v.XLVI-p87.1
4408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=4#v.XLVI-p87.1
4409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=9#v.XLVI-p87.1
4410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=0#v.XLVI-p87.1
4411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=2#v.XLVI-p90.1
4412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=18&scrV=4#v.XLVI-p88.1
4413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=19&scrV=11#v.CXVIII-p12.1
4414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=2#v.III-p32.1
4415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=14#v.CVIII-p141.1
4416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=14#v.CVIII-p185.1
4417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=16#v.XLVI-p57.1
4418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.XIV-p94.1
4419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=21&scrV=19#v.CVIII-p186.1
4420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=13#vi.vi.I-p140.1
4421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=14#v.CVIII-p70.1
4422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=18#v.LXXX-p13.1
4423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jdt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.XXII-p192.1
4424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jdt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.LIV-p100.1
4425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Jdt&scrCh=13&scrV=0#v.LXXIX-p114.1
4426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.XIV-p54.1
4427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vi.vi.II-p303.1
4428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=2&scrV=23#v.LI-p75.1
4429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=2&scrV=24#v.CVIII-p192.1
4430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vi.ix.I_1-p244.1
4431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.LVIII-p7.1
4432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.LX-p66.1
4433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=9#v.LXXIX-p50.1
4434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.XXXIX-p32.1
4435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.LX-p8.1
4436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.LXXIX-p15.1
4437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.LXXV-p17.1
4438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.LIV-p7.1
4439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.LXXIX-p51.1
4440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.XXXIX-p32.1
4441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.LX-p8.1
4442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.LXXIX-p15.1
4443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=5&scrV=4#v.XXIII-p22.1
4444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.XIV-p86.1
4445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vi.vi.II-p266.1
4446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=7&scrV=1#v.XLVI-p29.2
4447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=8&scrV=7#v.LII-p109.1
4448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=8&scrV=7#v.LXVI-p12.1
4449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.CVIII-p278.1
4450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.CXLIV-p19.1
4451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.CXLIV-p22.1
4452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=10&scrV=7#v.CXXII-p9.1
4453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Bar&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.LXXVII-p34.1
4454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Bar&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.XXXI-p9.1
4455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sus&scrCh=1&scrV=54#vii.iii.xiii-p5.2
4456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sus&scrCh=1&scrV=55#vii.iii.xiii-p5.2
4457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sus&scrCh=1&scrV=58#vii.iii.xiii-p5.2
4458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sus&scrCh=1&scrV=59#vii.iii.xiii-p5.2
4459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Bel&scrCh=1&scrV=33#v.III-p8.1
4460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Bel&scrCh=1&scrV=33#v.XXII-p87.1
4461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Macc&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi.ix.II-p250.1
4462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Macc&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.VII-p41.1
4463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=2Esd&scrCh=1&scrV=30#v.XLVI-p5.1
4464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.ix.II-p30.1
4465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.CXVIII-p25.1
4466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.vi.II-p51.1
4467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=3&scrV=30#v.LXVI-p34.1
4468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=3&scrV=30#v.LXXIX-p41.1
4469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=3&scrV=30#v.CVIII-p180.1
4470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=4&scrV=25#v.LXVI-p38.1
4471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=7&scrV=36#v.CXXVII-p41.1
4472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=8&scrV=7#vi.ix.II-p31.1
4473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vi.ix.II-p32.1
4474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=8&scrV=17#vi.ix.II-p33.1
4475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=9&scrV=2#vi.ix.II-p34.1
4476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=10&scrV=1#vi.ix.II-p35.1
4477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.CXXXIII-p16.1
4478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=10&scrV=30#v.CVII-p76.1
4479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=11&scrV=25#v.LXXVII-p42.1
4480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.LXXI-p43.1
4481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=13&scrV=2#v.CVIII-p256.1
4482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=22&scrV=6#v.CXVIII-p6.1
4483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=22&scrV=6#vii.iv.x-p8.1
4484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=25&scrV=9#v.LVII-p7.1
4485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=27&scrV=5#vi.vi.II-p50.1
4486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=27&scrV=25#v.CXXV-p133.1
4487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=46&scrV=1#v.LIII-p86.1
4488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p94.2
4489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p97.1
4490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVIII-p20.2
4491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXVIII-p2.2
4492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.II-p3.3
4493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-p324.1
4494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LV-p9.2
4495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-p62.1
4496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p41.3
4497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iv.iv-p17.1
4498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-p167.1
4499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p41.2
4500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-p103.1
4501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p328.1
4502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LV-p8.2
4503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLVI-p16.1
4504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.viii-p4.1
4505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-p167.2
4506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.II-p37.3
4507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXI-p13.1
4508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-p118.1
4509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVI-p29.1
4510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-p153.1
4511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-p188.1
4512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iv.iv-p15.1
4513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-p153.2
4514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXIX-p64.1
4515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XV-p29.1
4516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XV-p29.3
4517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXX-p44.1
4518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVII-p55.1
4519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXIII-p9.1
4520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.i-p11.1
4521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-p136.1
4522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.VII-p11.2
4523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXV-p110.1
4524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIII-p140.1
4525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p94.1
4526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXVII-p15.1
4527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXVII-p5.1
4528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p186.2
4529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p384.1
4530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-p213.2
4531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-p213.3
4532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.VII-p11.1
4533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-p259.1
4534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-p132.1
4535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p94.5
4536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.i-p13.1
4537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-p109.1
4538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVII-p51.1
4539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-p65.1
4540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.i-p18.1
4541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-p167.2
4542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-p30.1
4543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p114.2
4544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p10.2
4545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-p50.1
4546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-p31.2
4547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-p175.1
4548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-p97.1
4549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p209.2
4550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p209.3
4551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-p31.1
4552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-p31.2
4553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXVIII-p2.1
4554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-p178.1
4555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-p97.2
4556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLVI-p15.2
4557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p112.1
4558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p300.1
4559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXVII-p16.3
4560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LV-p7.1
4561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LV-p7.3
4562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.II-p3.2
4563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p29.1
4564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LV-p7.2
4565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIII-p15.2
4566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-p8.1
4567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-p42.1
4568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-p51.2
4569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-p54.1
4570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-p321.1
4571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXVII-p16.2
4572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-p78.2
4573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.II-p37.1
4574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXIX-p38.1
4575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LX-p50.1
4576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p298.1
4577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p301.1
4578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXIX-p107.2
4579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIV-p31.1
4580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p94.4
4581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p94.6
4582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p94.3
4583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-p167.3
4584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XV-p30.1
4585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XV-p32.1
4586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-p139.1
4587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-p139.2
4588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-p4.2
4589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.i-p11.2
4590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-p32.2
4591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIV-p103.1
4592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.iv-p12.1
4593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p236.2
4594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-p85.2
4595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXI-p32.2
4596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIII-p4.1
4597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXX-p9.1
4598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXI-p2.1
4599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXI-p7.1
4600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XCII-p10.1
4601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXX-p2.1
4602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIV-p67.1
4603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-p41.2
4604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p76.2
4605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-p270.2
4606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.xiii-p8.1
4607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.xiii-p7.1
4608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p92.1
4609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XV-p29.4
4610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVIII-p21.1
4611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXIX-p88.1
4612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-p32.1
4613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-p77.2
4614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-p71.1
4615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p92.2
4616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-p250.1
4617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p299.1
4618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-p34.1
4619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-p33.1
4620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-p120.2
4621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXX-p43.1
4622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIV-p26.1
4623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-p120.1
4624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.xiii-p6.1
4625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.xiii-p5.3
4626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.xiii-p5.1
4627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p228.1
4628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVII-p46.2
4629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIV-p50.1
4630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-p64.2
4631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-p64.1
4632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-p35.2
4633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXX-p10.2
4634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXIII-p5.1
4635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.II-p37.2
4636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-p91.2
4637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-p29.1
4638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXII-p6.2
4639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVI-p28.1
4640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.iv-p6.3
4641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p161.2
4642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-p161.1
4643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIV-p104.2
4644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIV-p104.1
4645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.iv-p6.1
4646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-p172.1
4647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CIX-p37.2
4648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.i-p14.1
4649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-p163.1
4650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.iv-p6.6
4651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.iv-p6.4
4652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#i-Page_i
4653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#ii-Page_iii
4654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iii-Page_v
4655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.I-Page_xi
4656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.II-Page_xii
4657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.II-Page_xiii
4658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.II-Page_xiv
4659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.II-Page_xv
4660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.III-Page_xvi
4661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.III-Page_xvii
4662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.III-Page_xviii
4663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.III-Page_xix
4664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.III-Page_xx
4665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.III-Page_xxi
4666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.III-Page_xxii
4667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.III-Page_xxiii
4668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.III-Page_xxiv
4669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.III-Page_xxv
4670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.IV-Page_xxvi
4671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.IV-Page_xxvii
4672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.V-Page_xxviii
4673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.V-Page_xxix
4674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.V-Page_xxx
4675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.V-Page_xxxi
4676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.V-Page_xxxii
4677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.V-Page_xxxiii
4678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#iv.VII-Page_xxxiv
4679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.I-Page_1
4680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.I-Page_2
4681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.I-Page_3
4682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.I-Page_4
4683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.III-Page_5
4684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.III-Page_6
4685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.IV-Page_7
4686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.V-Page_8
4687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.VII-Page_9
4688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.VII-Page_10
4689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.IX-Page_11
4690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.X-Page_12
4691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XII-Page_13
4692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XIV-Page_14
4693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XIV-Page_15
4694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XIV-Page_16
4695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XIV-Page_17
4696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XIV-Page_18
4697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XV-Page_19
4698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XV-Page_20
4699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XVII-Page_21
4700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XVIII-Page_22
4701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_23
4702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_24
4703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_25
4704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_26
4705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_27
4706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_28
4707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_29
4708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_30
4709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_31
4710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_32
4711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_33
4712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_34
4713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_35
4714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_36
4715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_37
4716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_38
4717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_39
4718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_40
4719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXII-Page_41
4720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXIII-Page_42
4721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXIV-Page_43
4722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXVII-Page_44
4723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXIX-Page_45
4724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXII-Page_46
4725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXIV-Page_47
4726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXVIII-Page_48
4727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXVIII-Page_49
4728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXIX-Page_50
4729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXIX-Page_51
4730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXIX-Page_52
4731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXIX-Page_53
4732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XXXIX-Page_54
4733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XL-Page_55
4734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLI-Page_56
4735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLII-Page_57
4736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLIII-Page_58
4737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLV-Page_59
4738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLV-Page_60
4739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVI-Page_61
4740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVI-Page_62
4741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVI-Page_63
4742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVI-Page_64
4743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVI-Page_65
4744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVII-Page_66
4745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_67
4746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_68
4747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_69
4748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_70
4749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_71
4750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_72
4751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_73
4752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_74
4753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_75
4754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_76
4755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_77
4756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_78
4757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLVIII-Page_79
4758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XLIX-Page_80
4759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.L-Page_81
4760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.L-Page_82
4761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-Page_83
4762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-Page_84
4763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-Page_85
4764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-Page_86
4765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-Page_87
4766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-Page_88
4767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LI-Page_89
4768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-Page_90
4769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-Page_91
4770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-Page_92
4771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-Page_93
4772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-Page_94
4773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-Page_95
4774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LII-Page_96
4775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIII-Page_97
4776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIII-Page_98
4777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIII-Page_99
4778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIII-Page_100
4779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIII-Page_101
4780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIII-Page_102
4781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIV-Page_103
4782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIV-Page_104
4783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIV-Page_105
4784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIV-Page_106
4785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIV-Page_107
4786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIV-Page_108
4787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LIV-Page_109
4788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LV-Page_110
4789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LV-Page_111
4790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LV-Page_112
4791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-Page_113
4792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-Page_114
4793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-Page_115
4794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-Page_116
4795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-Page_117
4796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-Page_118
4797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVII-Page_119
4798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVIII-Page_120
4799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVIII-Page_121
4800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVIII-Page_122
4801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LVIII-Page_123
4802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LX-Page_124
4803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LX-Page_125
4804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LX-Page_126
4805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LX-Page_127
4806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LX-Page_128
4807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LX-Page_129
4808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LX-Page_130
4809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LX-Page_131
4810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXI-Page_132
4811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXI-Page_133
4812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXII-Page_134
4813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXVI-Page_135
4814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXVI-Page_136
4815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXVI-Page_137
4816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXVI-Page_138
4817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXVI-Page_139
4818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXVI-Page_140
4819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXVIII-Page_141
4820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXIX-Page_142
4821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXIX-Page_143
4822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXIX-Page_144
4823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXIX-Page_145
4824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXIX-Page_146
4825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXIX-Page_147
4826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXIX-Page_148
4827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXX-Page_149
4828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXX-Page_150
4829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXX-Page_151
4830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXI-Page_152
4831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXI-Page_153
4832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXI-Page_154
4833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXV-Page_155
4834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXV-Page_156
4835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXVI-Page_157
4836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXVII-Page_158
4837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXVII-Page_159
4838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXVII-Page_160
4839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXVII-Page_161
4840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXVII-Page_162
4841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXVII-Page_163
4842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXIX-Page_164
4843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXIX-Page_165
4844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXIX-Page_166
4845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXIX-Page_167
4846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXIX-Page_168
4847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXX-Page_169
4848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXX-Page_170
4849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXII-Page_171
4850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXII-Page_172
4851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXII-Page_173
4852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXII-Page_174
4853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXII-Page_175
4854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIV-Page_176
4855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIV-Page_177
4856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIV-Page_178
4857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIV-Page_179
4858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIV-Page_180
4859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIV-Page_181
4860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXV-Page_182
4861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXVI-Page_183
4862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.LXXXIX-Page_184
4863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XCI-Page_185
4864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XCII-Page_186
4865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XCVII-Page_187
4866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.XCVII-Page_188
4867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.C-Page_189
4868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVII-Page_190
4869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVII-Page_191
4870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVII-Page_192
4871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVII-Page_193
4872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVII-Page_194
4873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVII-Page_195
4874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_196
4875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_197
4876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_198
4877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_199
4878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_200
4879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_201
4880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_202
4881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_203
4882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_204
4883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_205
4884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_206
4885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_207
4886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_208
4887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_209
4888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_210
4889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_211
4890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CVIII-Page_212
4891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CIX-Page_213
4892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CIX-Page_214
4893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXIV-Page_215
4894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVII-Page_216
4895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVII-Page_217
4896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVII-Page_218
4897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVII-Page_219
4898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVII-Page_220
4899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVIII-Page_221
4900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVIII-Page_222
4901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVIII-Page_223
4902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXVIII-Page_224
4903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXII-Page_225
4904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXII-Page_226
4905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXII-Page_227
4906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXII-Page_228
4907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXII-Page_229
4908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIII-Page_230
4909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIII-Page_231
4910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIII-Page_232
4911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIII-Page_233
4912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIII-Page_234
4913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIII-Page_235
4914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIII-Page_236
4915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIII-Page_237
4916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIII-Page_238
4917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIV-Page_239
4918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIV-Page_240
4919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIV-Page_241
4920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIV-Page_242
4921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIV-Page_243
4922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXIV-Page_244
4923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXV-Page_245
4924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXV-Page_246
4925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXV-Page_247
4926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXV-Page_248
4927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXV-Page_249
4928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXV-Page_250
4929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXV-Page_251
4930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXV-Page_252
4931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVI-Page_253
4932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVII-Page_254
4933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVII-Page_255
4934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVII-Page_256
4935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVII-Page_257
4936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVII-Page_258
4937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVIII-Page_259
4938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXVIII-Page_260
4939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_261
4940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_262
4941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_263
4942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_264
4943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_265
4944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_266
4945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_267
4946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_268
4947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_269
4948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_270
4949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_271
4950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXX-Page_272
4951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-Page_273
4952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-Page_274
4953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-Page_275
4954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-Page_276
4955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-Page_277
4956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-Page_278
4957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-Page_279
4958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXIII-Page_280
4959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXVI-Page_281
4960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXXXVIII-Page_282
4961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLIV-Page_283
4962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLIV-Page_284
4963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLIV-Page_285
4964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLIV-Page_286
4965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLIV-Page_287
4966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLV-Page_288
4967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLVI-Page_289
4968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLVII-Page_290
4969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLVII-Page_291
4970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLVII-Page_292
4971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLVII-Page_293
4972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLVII-Page_294
4973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#v.CXLVII-Page_295
4974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.i-Page_297
4975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.i-Page_299
4976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.i-Page_300
4977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.i-Page_301
4978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.i-Page_302
4979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.i-Page_303
4980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_304
4981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_305
4982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_306
4983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_307
4984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_308
4985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_309
4986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_310
4987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_311
4988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_312
4989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_313
4990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_314
4991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ii-Page_315
4992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iii-Page_316
4993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iii-Page_317
4994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iii-Page_318
4995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_319
4996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_320
4997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_321
4998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_322
4999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_323
5000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_324
5001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_325
5002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_326
5003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_327
5004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_328
5005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_329
5006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_330
5007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_331
5008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_332
5009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_333
5010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.iv-Page_334
5011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_335
5012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_336
5013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_337
5014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_338
5015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_339
5016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_340
5017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_341
5018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_342
5019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_343
5020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_344
5021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_345
5022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.v-Page_346
5023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_347
5024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_348
5025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_349
5026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_350
5027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_351
5028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_352
5029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_353
5030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_354
5031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_355
5032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_356
5033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_357
5034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_358
5035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_359
5036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_360
5037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_361
5038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_362
5039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_363
5040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_364
5041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_365
5042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_366
5043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_367
5044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_368
5045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_369
5046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_370
5047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_371
5048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_372
5049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_373
5050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_374
5051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_375
5052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_376
5053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_377
5054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_378
5055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_379
5056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_380
5057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_381
5058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_382
5059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_383
5060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_384
5061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_385
5062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.I-Page_386
5063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_387
5064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_388
5065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_389
5066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_390
5067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_391
5068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_392
5069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_393
5070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_394
5071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_395
5072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_396
5073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_397
5074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_398
5075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_399
5076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_400
5077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_401
5078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_402
5079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_403
5080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_404
5081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_405
5082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_406
5083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_407
5084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_408
5085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_409
5086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_410
5087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_411
5088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_412
5089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_413
5090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_414
5091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_415
5092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vi.II-Page_416
5093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vii-Page_417
5094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vii-Page_418
5095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vii-Page_419
5096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vii-Page_420
5097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vii-Page_421
5098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vii-Page_422
5099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.vii-Page_423
5100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_424
5101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_425
5102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_426
5103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_427
5104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_428
5105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_429
5106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_430
5107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_431
5108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_432
5109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_433
5110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_434
5111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_435
5112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_436
5113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_437
5114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_438
5115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_439
5116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_440
5117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_441
5118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_442
5119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_443
5120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_444
5121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_445
5122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_446
5123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.viii-Page_447
5124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.i-Page_448
5125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.i-Page_449
5126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_450
5127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_451
5128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_452
5129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_453
5130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_454
5131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_455
5132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_456
5133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_457
5134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_458
5135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_459
5136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_460
5137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_461
5138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_462
5139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_463
5140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_464
5141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_465
5142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.I_1-Page_466
5143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.II-Page_467
5144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.II-Page_468
5145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.II-Page_469
5146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.II-Page_470
5147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.II-Page_471
5148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_472
5149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_473
5150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_474
5151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_475
5152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_476
5153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_477
5154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_478
5155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_479
5156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_480
5157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_481
5158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_482
5159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vi.ix.III-Page_483
5160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.ii.i-Page_484
5161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.ii.ii-Page_485
5162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.ii.iv-Page_486
5163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.ii.v-Page_487
5164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.ii.viii-Page_488
5165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.ii-Page_489
5166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.iv-Page_490
5167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.vi-Page_491
5168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.viii-Page_492
5169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.xiii-Page_493
5170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iii.xv-Page_494
5171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iv.i-Page_495
5172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iv.ii-Page_496
5173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iv.iv-Page_497
5174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iv.iv-Page_498
5175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iv.viii-Page_499
5176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iv.x-Page_500
5177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iv.xii-Page_501
5178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf206/cache/npnf206.html3#vii.iv.xii-Page_502
