# source: Fathers/English/NPNF2/Volume VI.   Jerome - Letters and Select Works
# series: NPNF2
# volume: Volume VI.
# father: Jerome
# work: The Life of Paulus the First Hermit
# latin_match_candidate: Vita Pauli
# extracted: 2026-09-01
# note: Public-domain Schaff English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
The Life of Paulus the First Hermit.

   ------------------------

   The Life of Paulus was written in the year 374 or 375 during Jerome's
   stay in the desert of Syria, as is seen from c. 6, and was dedicated to
   Paulus of Concordia as stated in Jerome's Ep. x. c. 3.

   1. It has been a subject of wide-spread and frequent discussion what
   monk was the first to give a signal example of the hermit life. For
   some going back too far have found a beginning in those holy men Elias
   and John, of whom the former seems to have been more than a monk and
   the latter to have begun to prophesy before his birth. Others, and
   their opinion is that commonly received, maintain that Antony was the
   originator of this mode of life, which view is partly true. Partly I
   say, for the fact is not so much that he preceded the rest as that they
   all derived from him the necessary stimulus. But it is asserted even at
   the present day by Amathas and Macarius, two of Antony's disciples, the
   former of whom laid his master in the grave, that a certain Paul of
   Thebes was the leader in the movement, though not the first to bear the
   name, and this opinion has my approval also. Some as they think fit
   circulate stories such as this--that he was a man living in an
   underground cave with flowing hair down to his feet, and invent many
   incredible tales which it would be useless to detail. Nor does the
   opinion of men who lie without any sense of shame seem worthy of
   refutation. So then inasmuch as both Greek and Roman writers have
   handed down careful accounts of Antony, I have determined to write a
   short history of Paul's early and latter days, more because the thing
   has been passed over than from confidence in my own ability. What his
   middle life was like, and what snares of Satan he experienced, no man,
   it is thought, has yet discovered.

   2. During the persecutions of Decius and Valerian, [4014] when
   Cornelius at Rome and Cyprian at Carthage shed their blood in blessed
   martyrdom, many churches in Egypt and the Thebaid were laid waste by
   the fury of the storm. At that time the Christians would often pray
   that they might be smitten with the sword for the name of Christ. But
   the desire of the crafty foe was to slay the soul, not the body; and
   this he did by searching diligently for slow but deadly tortures. In
   the words of Cyprian himself who suffered at his hands: they who wished
   to die were not suffered to be slain. We give two illustrations, both
   as specially noteworthy and to make the cruelty of the enemy better
   known.

   3. A martyr, steadfast in faith, who stood fast as a conqueror amidst
   the racks and burning plates, was ordered by him to be smeared with
   honey and to be made to lie under a blazing sun with his hands tied
   behind his back, so that he who had already surmounted the heat of the
   frying-pan might be vanquished by the stings of flies. Another who was
   in the bloom of youth was taken by his command to some delightful
   pleasure gardens, and there amid white lilies and blushing roses, close
   by a gently murmuring stream, while overhead the soft whisper of the
   wind played among the leaves of the trees, was laid upon a deep
   luxurious feather-bed, bound with fetters of sweet garlands to prevent
   his escape. When all had withdrawn from him a harlot of great beauty
   drew near and began with voluptuous embrace to throw her arms around
   his neck, and, wicked even to relate! to handle his person, so that
   when once the lusts of the flesh were roused, she might accomplish her
   licentious purpose. What to do, and whither to turn, the soldier of
   Christ knew not. Unconquered by tortures he was being overcome by
   pleasure. At last with an inspiration from heaven he bit off the end of
   his tongue and spat it in her face as she kissed him. Thus the
   sensations of lust were subdued by the intense pain which followed.

   4. While such enormities were being perpetrated in the lower part of
   the Thebaid, Paul and his newly married sister were bereaved of both
   their parents, he being about sixteen years of age. He was heir to a
   rich inheritance, highly skilled in both Greek and Egyptian learning,
   gifted with a gentle disposition and a deep love for God. Amid the
   thunders of persecution he retired to a house at a considerable
   distance and in a more secluded spot. But to what crimes does not the
   "accursed thirst for gold" impel the human heart? His brother-in-law
   conceived the thought of betraying the youth whom he was bound to
   conceal. Neither a wife's tears which so often prevail, nor the ties of
   blood, nor the all-seeing eye of God above him could turn the traitor
   from his wickedness. "He came, he was urgent, he acted with cruelty
   while seeming only to press the claims of affection."

   5. The young man had the tact to understand this, and, conforming his
   will to the necessity, fled to the mountain wilds to wait for the end
   of the persecution. He began with easy stages, and repeated halts, to
   advance into the desert. At length he found a rocky mountain, at the
   foot of which, closed by a stone, was a cave of no great size. He
   removed the stone (so eager are men to learn what is hidden), made
   eager search, and saw within a large hall, open to the sky, but shaded
   by the wide-spread branches of an ancient palm. The tree, however, did
   not conceal a fountain of transparent clearness, the waters whereof no
   sooner gushed forth than the stream was swallowed up in a small opening
   of the same ground which gave it birth. There were besides in the
   mountain, which was full of cavities, many habitable places, in which
   were seen, now rough with rust, anvils and hammers for stamping money.
   The place, Egyptian writers relate, was a secret mint at the time of
   Antony's union with Cleopatra.

   6. Accordingly, regarding his abode as a gift from God, he fell in love
   with it, and there in prayer and solitude spent all the rest of his
   life. The palm afforded him food and clothing. And, that no one may
   deem this impossible, I call to witness Jesus and His holy angels that
   I have seen and still see in that part of the desert which lies between
   Syria and the Saracens' country, monks of whom one was shut up for
   thirty years and lived on barley bread and muddy water, while another
   in an old cistern (called in the country dialect of Syria Gubba) kept
   himself alive on five dried figs a day. What I relate then is so
   strange that it will appear incredible to those who do not believe the
   words that "all things are possible to him that believeth."

   7. But to return to the point at which I digressed. The blessed Paul
   had already lived on earth the life of heaven for a hundred and
   thirteen years, and Antony at the age of ninety was dwelling in another
   place of solitude (as he himself was wont to declare), when the thought
   occurred to the latter, that no monk more perfect than himself had
   settled in the desert. However, in the stillness of the night it was
   revealed to him that there was farther in the desert a much better man
   than he, and that he ought to go and visit him. So then at break of day
   the venerable old man, supporting and guiding his weak limbs with a
   staff, started to go: but what direction to choose he knew not.
   Scorching noontide came, with a broiling sun overhead, but still he did
   not suffer himself to be turned from the journey he had begun. Said he,
   "I believe in my God: some time or other He will shew me the
   fellow-servant whom He promised me." He said no more. All at once he
   beholds a creature of mingled shape, half horse half man, called by the
   poets Hippocentaur. At the sight of this he arms himself by making on
   his forehead the sign of salvation, and then exclaims, "Holloa! Where
   in these parts is a servant of God living?" The monster after gnashing
   out some kind of outlandish utterance, in words broken rather than
   spoken through his bristling lips, at length finds a friendly mode of
   communication, and extending his right hand points out the way desired.
   Then with swift flight he crosses the spreading plain and vanishes from
   the sight of his wondering companion. But whether the devil took this
   shape to terrify him, or whether it be that the desert which is known
   to abound in monstrous animals engenders that kind of creature also, we
   cannot decide.

   8. Antony was amazed, and thinking over what he had seen went on his
   way. Before long in a small rocky valley shut in on all sides he sees a
   mannikin with hooked snout, horned forehead, and extremities like
   goats' feet. When he saw this, Antony like a good soldier seized the
   shield of faith and the helmet of hope: the creature none the less
   began to offer to him the fruit of the palm-trees to support him on his
   journey and as it were pledges of peace. Antony perceiving this stopped
   and asked who he was. The answer he received from him was this: "I am a
   mortal being and one of those inhabitants of the desert whom the
   Gentiles deluded by various forms of error worship under the names of
   Fauns, Satyrs, and Incubi. I am sent to represent my tribe. We pray you
   in our behalf to entreat the favour of your Lord and ours, who, we have
   learnt, came once to save the world, and whose sound has gone forth
   into all the earth.'" As he uttered such words as these, the aged
   traveller's cheeks streamed with tears, the marks of his deep feeling,
   which he shed in the fulness of his joy. He rejoiced over the Glory of
   Christ and the destruction of Satan, and marvelling all the while that
   he could understand the Satyr's language, and striking the ground with
   his staff, he said, "Woe to thee, Alexandria, who instead of God
   worshippest monsters! Woe to thee, harlot city, into which have flowed
   together the demons of the whole world! What will you say now? Beasts
   speak of Christ, and you instead of God worship monsters." He had not
   finished speaking when, as if on wings, the wild creature fled away.
   Let no one scruple to believe this incident; its truth is supported by
   what took place when Constantine was on the throne, a matter of which
   the whole world was witness. For a man of that kind was brought alive
   to Alexandria and shewn as a wonderful sight to the people. Afterwards
   his lifeless body, to prevent its decay through the summer heat, was
   preserved in salt and brought to Antioch that the Emperor might see it.

   9. To pursue my proposed story. Antony traversed the region on which he
   had entered, seeing only the traces of wild beasts, and the wide waste
   of the desert. What to do, whither to wend his way, he knew not.
   Another day had now passed. One thing alone was left him, his confident
   belief that he could not be forsaken by Christ. The darkness of the
   second night he wore away in prayer. While it was still twilight, he
   saw not far away a she-wolf gasping with parching thirst and creeping
   to the foot of the mountain. He followed it with his eyes; and after
   the beast had disappeared in a cave he drew near and began to look
   within. His curiosity profited nothing: the darkness hindered vision.
   But, as the Scripture saith, perfect love casteth out fear. With
   halting step and bated breath he entered, carefully feeling his way; he
   advanced little by little and repeatedly listened for the sound. At
   length through the fearful midnight darkness a light appeared in the
   distance. In his eager haste he struck his foot against a stone and
   roused the echoes; whereupon the blessed Paul closed the open door and
   made it fast with a bar. Then Antony sank to the ground at the entrance
   and until the sixth hour or later craved admission, saying, "Who I am,
   whence, and why I have come, you know. I know I am not worthy to look
   upon you: yet unless I see you I will not go away. You welcome beasts:
   why not a man? I asked and I have found: I knock that it may be opened
   to me. But if I do not succeed, I will die here on your threshold. You
   will surely bury me when I am dead."

   "Such was his constant cry: unmoved he stood.

   To whom the hero thus brief answer made" [4015]

   "Prayers like these do not mean threats; there is no trickery in tears.
   Are you surprised at my not welcoming you when you have come here to
   die?" Thus with smiles Paul gave him access, and, the door being
   opened, they threw themselves into each other's arms, greeted one
   another by name, and joined in thanksgiving to God.

   10. After the sacred kiss Paul sat down and thus began to address
   Antony. "Behold the man whom you have sought with so much toil, his
   limbs decayed with age, his gray hairs unkempt. You see before you a
   man who ere long will be dust. But love endures all things. Tell me
   therefore, I pray you, how fares the human race? Are new homes
   springing up in the ancient cities? What government directs the world?
   Are there still some remaining for the demons to carry away by their
   delusions?" Thus conversing they noticed with wonder a raven which had
   settled on the bough of a tree, and was then flying gently down till it
   came and laid a whole loaf of bread before them. They were astonished,
   and when it had gone, "See," said Paul, "the Lord truly loving, truly
   merciful, has sent us a meal. For the last sixty years I have always
   received half a loaf: but at your coming Christ has doubled his
   soldier's rations."

   11. Accordingly, having returned thanks to the Lord, they sat down
   together on the brink of the glassy spring. At this point a dispute
   arose as to who should break the bread, and nearly the whole day until
   eventide was spent in the discussion. Paul urged in support of his view
   the rites of hospitality, Antony pleaded age. At length it was arranged
   that each should seize the loaf on the side nearest to himself, pull
   towards him, and keep for his own the part left in his hands. Then on
   hands and knees they drank a little water from the spring, and offering
   to God the sacrifice of praise passed the night in vigil. At the return
   of day the blessed Paul thus spoke to Antony: "I knew long since,
   brother, that you were dwelling in those parts: long ago God promised
   you to me for a fellow-servant; but the time of my falling asleep now
   draws nigh; I have always longed to be dissolved and to be with Christ;
   my course is finished, and there remains for me a crown of
   righteousness. Therefore you have been sent by the Lord to lay my poor
   body in the ground, yea to return earth to earth."

   12. On hearing this Antony with tears and groans began to pray that he
   would not desert him, but would take him for a companion on that
   journey. His friend replied: "You ought not to seek your own, but
   another man's good. It is expedient for you to lay aside the burden of
   the flesh and to follow the Lamb; but it is expedient for the rest of
   the brethren to be trained by your example. Wherefore be so good as to
   go and fetch the cloak Bishop Athanasius gave you, to wrap my poor body
   in." The blessed Paul asked this favour not because he cared much
   whether his corpse when it decayed were clothed or naked (why should he
   indeed, when he had so long worn a garment of palm-leaves stitched
   together?); but that he might soften his friend's regrets at his
   decease. Antony was astonished to find Paul had heard of Athanasius and
   his cloak; and, seeing as it were Christ Himself in him, he mentally
   worshipped God without venturing to add a single word; then silently
   weeping he once more kissed his eyes and hands, and set out on his
   return to the monastery which was afterwards seized by the Saracens.
   His steps lagged behind his will. Yet, exhausted as he was with fasting
   and broken by age, his courage proved victorious over his years.

   13. At last wearied and panting for breath he completed his journey and
   reached his little dwelling. Here he was met by two disciples who had
   begun to wait upon him in his advanced age. Said they, "Where have you
   stayed so long, father?" He replied, "Woe to me a sinner! I do not
   deserve the name of monk. I have seen Elias, I have seen John in the
   desert, and I have really seen Paul in Paradise." He then closed his
   lips, beat upon his breast, and brought out the cloak from his cell.
   When his disciples asked him to explain the matter somewhat more fully
   he said, "There is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak." [4016]

   14. He then went out, and without taking so much as a morsel of food
   returned the same way he came, longing for him alone, thirsting to see
   him, having eyes and thought for none but him. For he was afraid, and
   the event proved his anticipations correct, that in his absence his
   friend might yield up his spirit to Christ. And now another day had
   dawned and a three hours' journey still remained, when he saw Paul in
   robes of snowy white ascending on high among the bands of angels, and
   the choirs of prophets and apostles. Immediately he fell on his face,
   and threw the coarse sand upon his head, weeping and wailing as he
   cried, "Why do you cast me from you, Paul? Why go without one farewell?
   Have you made yourself known so late only to depart so soon?"

   15. The blessed Antony used afterwards to relate that he traversed the
   rest of the distance at such speed that he flew along like a bird; and
   not without reason: for on entering the cave he saw the lifeless body
   in a kneeling attitude, with head erect and hands uplifted. The first
   thing he did, supposing him to be alive, was to pray by his side. But
   when he did not hear the sighs which usually come from one in prayer,
   he fell to kisses and tears, and he then understood that even the dead
   body of the saint with duteous gestures was praying to God unto whom
   all things live.

   16. Then having wrapped up the body and carried it forth, all the while
   chanting hymns and psalms according to the Christian tradition, Antony
   began to lament that he had no implement for digging the ground. So in
   a surging sea of thought and pondering many plans he said: "If I return
   to the monastery, there is a four days' journey: if I stay here I shall
   do no good. I will die then, as is fitting, beside Thy warrior, O
   Christ, and will quickly breathe my last breath. While he turned these
   things over in his mind, behold, two lions from the recesses of the
   desert with manes flying on their necks came rushing along. At first he
   was horrified at the sight, but again turning his thoughts to God, he
   waited without alarm, as though they were doves that he saw. They came
   straight to the corpse of the blessed old man and there stopped, fawned
   upon it and lay down at its feet, roaring aloud as if to make it known
   that they were mourning in the only way possible to them. Then they
   began to paw the ground close by, and vie with one another in
   excavating the sand, until they dug out a place just large enough to
   hold a man. And immediately, as if demanding a reward for their work,
   pricking up their ears while they lowered their heads, they came to
   Antony and began to lick his hands and feet. He perceived that they
   were begging a blessing from him, and at once with an outburst of
   praise to Christ that even dumb animals felt His divinity, he said,
   "Lord, without whose command not a leaf drops from the tree, not a
   sparrow falls to the ground, grant them what thou knowest to be best."
   Then he waved his hand and bade them depart. When they were gone he
   bent his aged shoulders beneath the burden of the saint's body, laid it
   in the grave, covered it with the excavated soil, and raised over it
   the customary mound. Another day dawned, and then, that the
   affectionate heir might not be without something belonging to the
   intestate dead, he took for himself the tunic which after the manner of
   wicker-work the saint had woven out of palm-leaves. And so returning to
   the monastery he unfolded everything in order to his disciples, and on
   the feast-days of Easter and Pentecost he always wore Paul's tunic.

   17. I may be permitted at the end of this little treatise to ask those
   who do not know the extent of their possessions, who adorn their homes
   with marble, who string house to house and field to field, what did
   this old man in his nakedness ever lack? Your drinking vessels are of
   precious stones; he satisfied his thirst with the hollow of his hand.
   Your tunics are of wrought gold; he had not the raiment of the meanest
   of your slaves. But on the other hand, poor though he was, Paradise is
   open to him; you with all your gold will be received into Gehenna. He
   though naked yet kept the robe of Christ; you, clad in your silks, have
   lost the vesture of Christ. Paul lies covered with worthless dust, but
   will rise again to glory; over you are raised costly tombs, but both
   you and your wealth are doomed to the burning. Have a care, I pray you,
   at least have a care for the riches you love. Why are even the
   grave-clothes of your dead made of gold? Why does not your vaunting
   cease even amid mourning and tears? Cannot the carcases of rich men
   decay except in silk?

   18. I beseech you, reader, whoever you may be, to remember Jerome the
   sinner. He, if God would give him his choice, would much sooner take
   Paul's tunic with his merits, than the purple of kings with their
   punishment.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4014] a.d. 249-260.

   [4015] Virg. Æn. ii, 650, and vi, 672.

   [4016] Eccl. iii. 7.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Life of S. Hilarion.

   ------------------------

   The life of Hilarion was written by Jerome in 390 at Bethlehem. Its
   object was to further the ascetic life to which he was devoted. It
   contains, amidst much that is legendary, some statements which attach
   it to genuine history, and is in any case a curious record of the state
   of the human mind in the 4th century. A theory started in Germany, that
   it was a sort of religious romance, seems destitute of foundation. It
   may possibly have been, in Jerome's intention, a contribution to the
   church history the writing of which he proposed but never executed.
   (See the Life of Malchus, c. 1.)

   1. Before I begin to write the life of the blessed Hilarion I invoke
   the aid of the Holy Spirit who dwelt in him, that He who bestowed upon
   the saint his virtues may grant me such power of speech to relate them
   that my words may be adequate to his deeds. For the virtue of those who
   have done great deeds is esteemed in proportion to the ability with
   which it has been praised by men of genius. Alexander the Great of
   Macedon who is spoken of by Daniel as the ram, or the panther, or the
   he-goat, on reaching the grave of Achilles exclaimed "Happy Youth! to
   have the privilege of a great herald of your worth," meaning, of
   course, Homer. I, however, have to tell the story of the life and
   conversation of a man so renowned that even Homer were he here would
   either envy me the theme or prove unequal to it. It is true that that
   holy man Epiphanius, bishop of Salamis in Cyprus, who had much
   intercourse with Hilarion, set forth his praises in a short but widely
   circulated letter. Yet it is one thing to praise the dead in general
   terms, another to relate their characteristic virtues. And so we in
   taking up the work begun by him do him service rather than wrong: we
   despise the abuse of some who as they once disparaged my hero Paulus,
   [4017] will now perhaps disparage Hilarion; the former they censured
   for his solitary life; they may find fault with the latter for his
   intercourse with the world; the one was always out of sight, therefore
   they think he had no existence; the other was seen by many, therefore
   he is deemed of no account. It is just what their ancestors the
   Pharisees did of old! they were not pleased with [4018] John fasting in
   the desert, nor with our Lord and Saviour in the busy throng, eating
   and drinking. But I will put my hand to the work on which I have
   resolved, and go on my way closing my ears to the barking of Scylla's
   hounds.

   2. The birth place of Hilarion was the village Thabatha, situate about
   five miles to the south of Gaza, a city of Palestine. His parents were
   idolaters, and therefore, as the saying is, the rose blossomed on the
   thorn. By them he was committed to the charge of a Grammarian at
   Alexandria, where, so far as his age allowed, he gave proofs of
   remarkable ability and character: and in a short time endeared himself
   to all and became an accomplished speaker. More important than all
   this, he was a believer in the Lord Jesus, and took no delight in the
   madness of the circus, the blood of the arena, the excesses of the
   theatre: his whole pleasure was in the assemblies of the Church.

   3. At that time he heard of the famous name of Antony, which was in the
   mouth of all the races of Egypt. He was fired with a desire to see him,
   and set out for the desert. He no sooner saw him than he changed his
   former mode of life and abode with him about two months, studying the
   method of his life and the gravity of his conduct: his assiduity in
   prayer, his humility in his dealings with the brethren, his severity in
   rebuke, his eagerness in exhortation. He noted too that the saint would
   never on account of bodily weakness break his rule of abstinence or
   deviate from the plainness of his food. At last, unable to endure any
   longer the crowds of those who visited the saint because of various
   afflictions or the assaults of demons, and deeming it a strange anomaly
   that he should have to bear in the desert the crowds of the cities, he
   thought it was better for him to begin as Antony had begun. Said he:
   "Antony is reaping the reward of victory like a hero who has proved his
   bravery. I have not entered on the soldier's career." He therefore
   returned with certain monks to his country, and, his parents being now
   dead, gave part of his property to his brothers, part to the poor,
   keeping nothing at all for himself, for he remembered with awe the
   passage in the Acts of the Apostles and dreaded the example and the
   punishment of Ananias and Sapphira; above all he was mindful of the
   Lord's words, [4019] "whosoever he be of you that renounceth not all
   that he hath, he cannot be my disciple." At this time he was about
   fifteen years old. Accordingly, stripped bare and armed with the
   weapons of Christ, he entered the wilderness which stretches to the
   left seven miles from Majoma, the port of Gaza, as you go along the
   coast to Egypt. And although the locality had a record of robbery and
   of blood, and his relatives and friends warned him of the danger he was
   incurring, he despised death that he might escape death.

   4. His courage and tender years would have been a marvel to all, were
   it not that his heart was on fire and his eyes bright with the gleams
   and sparks of faith. His cheeks were smooth, his body thin and
   delicate, unfit to bear the slightest injury which cold or heat could
   inflict. What then? With no other covering for his limbs but a shirt of
   sackcloth, and a cloak of skins which the blessed Antony had given him
   when he set out, and a blanket of the coarsest sort, he found pleasure
   in the vast and terrible wilderness with the sea on one side and the
   marshland on the other. His food was only fifteen dried figs after
   sunset. And because the district was notorious for brigandage, it was
   his practice never to abide long in the same place. What was the devil
   to do? Whither could he turn? He who once boasted and said, [4020] "I
   will ascend into heaven, I will set my throne above the stars of the
   sky, I will be like the most High," saw himself conquered and trodden
   under foot by a boy whose years did not allow of sin.

   5. Satan therefore tickled his senses and, as is his wont, lighted in
   his maturing body the fires of lust. This mere beginner in Christ's
   school was forced to think of what he knew not, and to revolve whole
   trains of thought concerning that of which he had no experience. Angry
   with himself and beating his bosom (as if with the blow of his hand he
   could shut out his thoughts) "Ass!" he exclaimed, "I'll stop your
   kicking, I will not feed you with barley, but with chaff. I will weaken
   you with hunger and thirst, I will lade you with heavy burdens, I will
   drive you through heat and cold, that you may think more of food than
   wantonness." So for three or four days afterwards he sustained his
   sinking spirit with the juice of herbs and a few dried figs, praying
   frequently and singing, and hoeing the ground that the suffering of
   fasting might be doubled by the pain of toil. At the same time he wove
   baskets of rushes and emulated the discipline of the Egyptian monks,
   and put into practice the Apostle's precept, [4021] "If any will not
   work, neither let him eat." By these practices he became so enfeebled
   and his frame so wasted, that his bones scarcely held together.

   6. One night he began to hear the wailing of infants, the bleating of
   flocks, the lowing of oxen, the lament of what seemed to be women, the
   roaring of lions, the noise of an army, and moreover various portentous
   cries which made him in alarm shrink from the sound ere he had the
   sight. He understood that the demons were disporting themselves, and
   falling on his knees he made the sign of the cross on his forehead.
   Thus armed as he lay he fought the more bravely, half longing to see
   those whom he shuddered to hear, and anxiously looking in every
   direction. Meanwhile all at once in the bright moonlight he saw a
   chariot with dashing steeds rushing upon him. He called upon Jesus, and
   suddenly before his eyes, the earth was opened and the whole array was
   swallowed up. Then he said, [4022] "The horse and his rider hath He
   thrown into the sea." And, [4023] "Some trust in chariots, and some in
   horses; but we will triumph in the name of the Lord our God."

   7. So many were his temptations and so various the snares of demons
   night and day, that if I wished to relate them, a volume would not
   suffice. How often when he lay down did naked women appear to him, how
   often sumptuous feasts when he was hungry! Sometimes as he prayed a
   howling wolf sprang past or a snarling fox, and when he sang a
   gladiatorial show was before him, and a man newly slain would seem to
   fall at his feet and ask him for burial.

   8. Once upon a time he was praying with his head upon the ground. As is
   the way with men, his attention was withdrawn from his devotions, and
   he was thinking of something else, when a tormentor sprang upon his
   back and driving his heels into his sides and beating him across the
   neck with a horse-whip cried out "Come! why are you asleep?" Then with
   a loud laugh asked if he was tired and would like to have some barley.

   9. From his sixteenth to his twentieth year he shielded himself from
   heat and rain in a little hut which he had constructed of reeds and
   sedge. Afterwards he built himself a small cell which remains to the
   present day, five feet in height, that is less than his own height, and
   only a little more in length. One might suppose it a tomb rather than a
   house.

   10. He shaved his hair once a year on Easter Day, and until his death
   was accustomed to lie on the bare ground or on a bed of rushes. The
   sackcloth which he had once put on he never washed, and he used to say
   that it was going too far to look for cleanliness in goats' hair-cloth.
   Nor did he change his shirt unless the one he wore was almost in rags.
   He had committed the Sacred Writings to memory, and after prayer and
   singing was wont to recite them as if in the presence of God. It would
   be tedious to narrate singly the successive steps of his spiritual
   ascent; I will therefore set them in a summary way before my reader,
   and describe his mode of life at each stage, and will afterwards return
   to proper historical sequence.

   11. From his twentieth to his twenty-seventh year, for three years his
   food was half a pint of lentils moistened with cold water, and for the
   next three dry bread with salt and water. From his twenty-seventh year
   onward to the thirtieth, he supported himself on wild herbs and the raw
   roots of certain shrubs. From his thirty-first to his thirty-fifth
   year, he had for food six ounces of barley bread, and vegetables
   slightly cooked without oil. But finding his eyes growing dim and his
   whole body shrivelled with a scabby eruption and dry mange, he added
   oil to his former food and up to the sixty-third year of his life
   followed this temperate course, tasting neither fruit nor pulse, nor
   anything whatsoever besides. Then when he saw that his bodily health
   was broken down, and thought death was near, from his sixty-fourth year
   to his eightieth he abstained from bread. The fervour of his spirit was
   so wonderful, that at times when others are wont to allow themselves
   some laxity of living he appeared to be entering like a novice on the
   service of the Lord. He made a sort of broth from meal and bruised
   herbs, food and drink together scarcely weighing six ounces, and, while
   obeying this rule of diet, he never broke his fast before sunset, not
   even on festivals nor in severe sickness. But it is now time to return
   to the course of event.

   12. While still living in the hut, at the age of eighteen, robbers came
   to him by night, either supposing that he had something which they
   might carry off, or considering that they would be brought into
   contempt if a solitary boy felt no dread of their attacks. They
   searched up and down between the sea and the marsh from evening until
   daybreak without being able to find his resting place. Then, having
   discovered the boy by the light of day they asked him, half in jest,
   "What would you do if robbers came to you?" He replied, "He that has
   nothing does not fear robbers." Said they, "At all events, you might be
   killed." "I might," said he, "I might; and therefore I do not fear
   robbers because I am prepared to die." Then they marvelled at his
   firmness and faith, confessed how they had wandered about in the night,
   and how their eyes had been blinded, and promised to lead a stricter
   life in the future.

   13. He had now spent twenty-two years in the wilderness and was the
   common theme in all the cities of Palestine, though everywhere known by
   repute only. The first person bold enough to break into the presence of
   the blessed Hilarion was a certain woman of Eleutheropolis who found
   that she was despised by her husband on account of her sterility (for
   in fifteen years she had borne no fruit of wedlock). He had no
   expectation of her coming when she suddenly threw herself at his feet.
   "Forgive my boldness," she said: "take pity on my necessity. Why do you
   turn away your eyes? Why shun my entreaties? Do not think of me as a
   woman, but as an object of compassion. It was my sex that bore the
   Saviour. [4024] They that are whole have no need of a physician, but
   they that are sick." At length, after a long time he no longer turned
   away, but looked at the woman and asked the cause of her coming and of
   her tears. On learning this he raised his eyes to heaven and bade her
   have faith, then wept over her as she departed. Within a year he saw
   her with a son.

   14. This his first miracle was succeeded by another still greater and
   more notable. Aristæneté the wife of Elpidius who was afterwards
   pretorian prefect, a woman well known among her own people, still
   better known among Christians, on her return with her husband, from
   visiting the blessed Antony, was delayed at Gaza by the sickness of her
   three children; for there, whether it was owing to the vitiated
   atmosphere, or whether it was, as afterwards became clear, for the
   glory of God's servant Hilarion, they were all alike seized by a
   semi-tertian ague and despaired of by the physicians. The mother lay
   wailing, or as one might say walked up and down between the corpses of
   her three sons not knowing which she should first have to mourn for.
   When, however, she knew that there was a certain monk in the
   neighbouring wilderness, forgetting her matronly state (she only
   remembered she was a mother) she set out accompanied by her handmaids
   and eunuchs, and was hardly persuaded by her husband to take an ass to
   ride upon. On reaching the saint she said, "I pray you by Jesus our
   most merciful God, I beseech you by His cross and blood, to restore to
   me my three sons, so that the name of our Lord and Saviour may be
   glorified in the city of the Gentiles. Then shall his servants enter
   Gaza and the idol Marnas shall fall to the ground." At first he refused
   and said that he never left his cell and was not accustomed to enter a
   house, much less the city; but she threw herself upon the ground and
   cried repeatedly, "Hilarion, servant of Christ, give me back my
   children: Antony kept them safe in Egypt, do you save them in Syria."
   All present were weeping, and the saint himself wept as he denied her.
   What need to say more? the woman did not leave him till he promised
   that he would enter Gaza after sunset. On coming thither he made the
   sign of the cross over the bed and fevered limbs of each, and called
   upon the name of Jesus. Marvellous efficacy of the Name! As if from
   three fountains the sweat burst forth at the same time: in that very
   hour they took food, recognized their mourning mother, and, with thanks
   to God, warmly kissed the saint's hands. When the matter was noised
   abroad, and the fame of it spread far and wide, the people flocked to
   him from Syria and Egypt, so that many believed in Christ and professed
   themselves monks. For as yet there were no monasteries in Palestine,
   nor had anyone known a monk in Syria before the saintly Hilarion. It
   was he who originated this mode of life and devotion, and who first
   trained men to it in that province. The Lord Jesus had in Egypt the
   aged Antony: in Palestine He had the youthful Hilarion.

   15. Facidia is a hamlet belonging to Rhino-Corura, a city of Egypt.
   From this village a woman who had been blind for ten years was brought
   to the blessed Hilarion, and on being presented to him by the brethren
   (for there were now many monks with him) affirmed that she had spent
   all her substance on physicians. The saint replied: "If you had given
   to the poor what you have wasted on physicians, the true physician
   Jesus would have cured you." But when she cried aloud and entreated
   pity, he spat into her eyes, in imitation of the Saviour, and with
   similar instant effect.

   16. A charioteer, also of Gaza, stricken by a demon in his chariot
   became perfectly stiff, so that he could neither move his hand nor bend
   his neck. He was brought on a litter, but could only signify his
   petition by moving his tongue; and was told that he could not be healed
   unless he first believed in Christ and promised to forsake his former
   occupation. He believed, he promised, and he was healed: and rejoiced
   more in the saving of the soul than in that of the body.

   17. Again, a very powerful youth called Marsitas from the neighbourhood
   of Jerusalem plumed himself so highly on his strength that he carried
   fifteen bushels of grain for a long time and over a considerable
   distance, and considered it as his highest glory that he could beat the
   asses in endurance. This man was afflicted with a grievous demon and
   could not endure chains, or fetters, but broke even the bolts and bars
   of the doors. He had bitten off the noses and ears of many: had broken
   the feet of some, the legs of others. He had struck such terror of
   himself into everybody, that he was laden with chains and dragged by
   ropes on all sides like a wild bull to the monastery. As soon as the
   brethren saw him they were greatly alarmed (for the man was of gigantic
   size) and told the Father. He, seated as he was, commanded him to be
   brought to him and released. When he was free, "Bow your head," said
   he, "and come." The man began to tremble; he twisted his neck round and
   did not dare to look him in the face, but laid aside all his fierceness
   and began to lick his feet as he sat. At last the demon which had
   possessed the young man being tortured by the saint's adjurations came
   forth on the seventh day.

   18. Nor must we omit to tell that Orion, a leading man and wealthy
   citizen of Aira, on the coast of the Red Sea, being possessed by a
   legion of demons was brought to him. Hands, neck, sides, feet were
   laden with iron, and his glaring eyes portended an access of raging
   madness. As the saint was walking with the brethren and expounding some
   passage of Scripture the man broke from the hands of his keepers,
   clasped him from behind and raised him aloft. There was a shout from
   all, for they feared lest he might crush his limbs wasted as they were
   with fasting. The saint smiled and said, "Be quiet, and let me have my
   rival in the wrestling match to myself." Then he bent back his hand
   over his shoulder till he touched the man's head, seized his hair and
   drew him round so as to be foot to foot with him; he then stretched
   both his hands in a straight line, and trod on his two feet with both
   his own, while he cried out again and again, "To torment with you! ye
   crowd of demons, to torment!" The sufferer shouted aloud and bent back
   his neck till his head touched the ground, while the saint said, "Lord
   Jesus, release this wretched man, release this captive. Thine it is to
   conquer many, no less than one." What I now relate is unparalleled:
   from one man's lips were heard different voices and as it were the
   confused shouts of a multitude. Well, he too was cured, and not long
   after came with his wife and children to the monastery bringing many
   gifts expressive of his gratitude. The saint thus addressed him--"Have
   you not read what befell Gehazi and Simon, one of whom took a reward,
   the other offered it, the former in order to sell grace, the latter to
   buy it?" And when Orion said with tears, "Take it and give it to the
   poor," he replied, "You can best distribute your own gifts, for you
   tread the streets of the cities and know the poor. Why should I who
   have forsaken my own seek another man's? To many the name of the poor
   is a pretext for their avarice; but compassion knows no artifices. No
   one better spends than he who keeps nothing for himself." The man was
   sad and lay upon the ground. "Be not sad, my son," he said; "what I do
   for my own good I do also for yours. If I were to take these gifts I
   should myself offend God, and, moreover, the legion would return to
   you."

   19. There is a story relating to Majomites of Gaza which it is
   impossible to pass over in silence. While quarrying building stones on
   the shore not far from the monastery he was helplessly paralysed, and
   after being carried to the saint by his fellow-workman immediately
   returned to his work in perfect health. I ought to explain that the
   shore of Palestine and Egypt naturally consists of soft sand and gravel
   which gradually becomes consolidated and hardens into rock; and thus
   though to the eye it remains the same it is no longer the same to the
   touch.

   20. Another story relates to Italicus, a citizen of the same town. He
   was a Christian and kept horses for the circus to contend against those
   of the Duumvir of Gaza who was a votary of the idol god Marnas. This
   custom at least in Roman cities was as old as the days of Romulus, and
   was instituted in commemoration of the successful seizure of the Sabine
   women. The chariots raced seven times round the circus in honour of
   Consus in his character of the God of Counsel. [4025] Victory lay with
   the team which tired out the horses opposed to them. Now the rival of
   Italicus had in his pay a magician to incite his horses by certain
   demoniacal incantations, and keep back those of his opponent. Italicus
   therefore came to the blessed Hilarion and besought his aid not so much
   for the injury of his adversary as for protection for himself. It
   seemed absurd for the venerable old man to waste prayers on trifles of
   this sort. He therefore smiled and said, "Why do you not rather give
   the price of the horses to the poor for the salvation of your soul?"
   His visitor replied that his office was a public duty, and that he
   acted not so much from choice as from compulsion, that no Christian man
   could employ magic, but would rather seek aid from a servant of Christ,
   especially against the people of Gaza who were enemies of God, and who
   would exult over the Church of Christ more than over him. At the
   request therefore of the brethren who were present he ordered an
   earthenware cup out of which he was wont to drink to be filled with
   water and given to Italicus. The latter took it and sprinkled it over
   his stable and horses, his charioteers and his chariot, and the
   barriers of the course. The crowd was in a marvellous state of
   excitement, for the enemy in derision had published the news of what
   was going to be done, and the backers of Italicus were in high spirits
   at the victory which they promised themselves. The signal is given; the
   one team flies towards the goal, the other sticks fast: the wheels are
   glowing hot beneath the chariot of the one, while the other scarce
   catches a glimpse of their opponents' backs as they flit past. The
   shouts of the crowd swell to a roar, and the heathens themselves with
   one voice declare Marnas is conquered by Christ. After this the
   opponents in their rage demanded that Hilarion as a Christian magician
   should be dragged to execution. This decisive victory and several
   others which followed in successive games of the circus caused many to
   turn to the faith.

   21. There was a youth in the neighbourhood of the same market-town of
   Gaza who was desperately in love with one of God's virgins. After he
   had tried again and again those touches, jests, nods, and whispers
   which so commonly lead to the destruction of virginity, but had made no
   progress by these means, he went to a magician at Memphis to whom he
   proposed to make known his wretched state, and then, fortified with his
   arts, to return to his assault upon the virgin. Accordingly after a
   year's instruction by the priest of Æsculapius, who does not heal souls
   but destroys them, he came full of the lust which he had previously
   allowed his mind to entertain, and buried beneath the threshold of the
   girl's house certain magical formulæ and revolting figures engraven on
   a plate of Cyprian brass. Thereupon the maid began to show signs of
   insanity, to throw away the covering of her head, tear her hair, gnash
   her teeth, and loudly call the youth by name. Her intense affection had
   become a frenzy. Her parents therefore brought her to the monastery and
   delivered her to the aged saint. No sooner was this done than the devil
   began to howl and confess. "I was compelled, I was carried off against
   my will. How happy I was when I used to beguile the men of Memphis in
   their dreams! What crosses, what torture I suffer! You force me to go
   out, and I am kept bound under the threshold. I cannot go out unless
   the young man who keeps me there lets me go." The old man answered,
   "Your strength must be great indeed, if a bit of thread and a plate can
   keep you bound. Tell me, how is it that you dared to enter into this
   maid who belongs to God?" "That I might preserve her as a virgin," said
   he. "You preserve her, betrayer of chastity! Why did you not rather
   enter into him who sent you?" "For what purpose," he answers, "should I
   enter into one who was in alliance with a comrade of my own, the demon
   of love?" But the saint would not command search to be made for either
   the young man or the charms till the maiden had undergone a process of
   purgation, for fear that it might be thought that the demon had been
   released by means of incantations, or that he himself had attached
   credit to what he said. He declared that demons are deceitful and well
   versed in dissimulation, and sharply rebuked the virgin when she had
   recovered her health for having by her conduct given an opportunity for
   the demon to enter.

   22. It was not only in Palestine and the neighbouring cities of Egypt
   or Syria that he was in high repute, but his fame had reached distant
   provinces. An officer [4026] of the Emperor Constantius whose golden
   hair and personal beauty revealed his country (it lay between the
   Saxons and the Alemanni, was of no great extent but powerful, and is
   known to historians as Germany, but is now called France), had long,
   that is to say from infancy, been pursued by a devil, who forced him in
   the night to howl, groan, and gnash his teeth. He therefore secretly
   asked the Emperor for a post-warrant, plainly telling him why he wanted
   it, and having also obtained letters to the legate at Palestine came
   with great pomp and a large retinue to Gaza. On his inquiring of the
   local senators where Hilarion the monk dwelt, the people of Gaza were
   much alarmed, and supposing that he had been sent by the Emperor,
   brought him to the monastery, that they might show respect to one so
   highly accredited, and that, if any guilt had been incurred by them by
   injuries previously done by them to Hilarion it might be obliterated by
   their present dutifulness. The old man at the time was taking a walk on
   the soft sands and was humming some passage or other from the psalms.
   Seeing so great a company approaching he stopped, and having returned
   the salutes of all while he raised his hand and gave them his blessing,
   after an hour's interval he bade the rest withdraw, but would have his
   visitor together with servants and officers remain: for by the man's
   eyes and countenance he knew the cause of his coming. Immediately on
   being questioned by the servant of God the man sprang up on tiptoe, so
   as scarcely to touch the ground with his feet, and with a wild roar
   replied in Syriac in which language he had been interrogated. Pure
   Syriac was heard flowing from the lips of a barbarian who knew only
   French and Latin, and that without the absence of a sibilant, or an
   aspirate, or an idiom of the speech of Palestine. The demon then
   confessed by what means he had entered into him. Further, that his
   interpreters who knew only Greek and Latin might understand, Hilarion
   questioned him also in Greek, and when he gave the same answer in the
   same words and alleged in excuse many occasions on which spells had
   been laid upon him, and how he was bound to yield to magic arts, "I
   care not," said the saint, "how you came to enter, but I command you in
   the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to come out." The man, as soon as he
   was healed, with a rough simplicity offered him ten pounds of gold. But
   the saint took from him only bread, and told him that they who were
   nourished on such food regarded gold as mire.

   23. It is not enough to speak of men; brute animals were also daily
   brought to him in a state of madness, and among them a Bactrian camel
   of enormous size amid the shouts of thirty men or more who held him
   tight with stout ropes. He had already injured many. His eyes were
   bloodshot, his mouth filled with foam, his rolling tongue swollen, and
   above every other source of terror was his loud and hideous roar. Well,
   the old man ordered him to be let go. At once those who brought him as
   well as the attendants of the saint fled away without exception. The
   saint went by himself to meet him, and addressing him in Syriac said,
   "You do not alarm me, devil, huge though your present body is. Whether
   in a fox or a camel you are just the same." Meanwhile he stood with
   outstretched hand. The brute raging and looking as if he would devour
   Hilarion came up to him, but immediately fell down, laid its head on
   the ground, and to the amazement of all present showed suddenly no less
   tameness than it had exhibited ferocity before. But the old man
   declared to them how the devil, for men's sake, seizes even beasts of
   burden; that he is inflamed by such intense hatred for men that he
   desires to destroy not only them but what belongs to them. As an
   illustration of this he added the fact that before he was permitted to
   try the saintly Job, he made an end of all his substance. Nor ought it
   to disturb anyone that [4027] by the Lord's command two thousand swine
   were slain by the agency of demons, since those who witnessed the
   miracle could not have believed that so great a multitude of demons had
   gone out of the man unless an equally vast number of swine had rushed
   to ruin, showing that it was a legion that impelled them.

   24. Time would fail me if I wished to relate all the miracles which
   were wrought by him. For to such a pitch of glory was he raised by the
   Lord that the blessed Antony among the rest hearing of his life wrote
   to him and gladly received his letters. And if ever the sick from Syria
   came to him he would say to them, "Why have you taken the trouble to
   come so far, when you have there my son Hilarion?" Following his
   example, however, innumerable monasteries sprang up throughout the
   whole of Palestine, and all the monks flocked to him. When he saw this
   he praised the Lord for His grace, and exhorted them individually to
   the profit of their souls, telling them that the fashion of this world
   passes away, and that the true life is that which is purchased by
   suffering in the present.

   25. Wishing to set the monks an example of humility and of zeal he was
   accustomed on fixed days before the vintage to visit their cells. When
   the brethren knew this they would all come together to meet him, and in
   company with their distinguished leader go the round of the
   monasteries, taking with them provisions, because sometimes as many as
   two thousand men were assembled. But, as time went on, all the
   settlements round gladly gave food to the neighbouring monks for the
   entertainment of the saints. Moreover, the care he took to prevent any
   brother however humble or poor being passed over is evidenced by the
   journey which he once took into the desert of Cades to visit one of his
   disciples. With a great company of monks he reached Elusa, as it
   happened on the day when the annual festival had brought all the people
   together to the temple of Venus. This, goddess is worshipped on account
   of Lucifer to whom the Saracen nation is devoted. The very town too is
   to a great extent semi-barbarous, owing to its situation. When
   therefore it was heard that Saint Hilarion was passing through (he had
   frequently healed many Saracens possessed by demons), they went to meet
   him in crowds with their wives and children, bending their heads and
   crying in the Syriac tongue Barech, that is, Bless. He received them
   with courtesy and humility, and prayed that they might worship God
   rather than stones; at the same time, weeping copiously, he looked up
   to heaven and promised that if they would believe in Christ he would
   visit them often. By the marvellous grace of God they did not suffer
   him to depart before he had drawn the outline of a church, and their
   priest with his garland upon his head had been signed with the sign of
   Christ.

   26. Another year, again, when he was setting out to visit the
   monasteries and was drawing up a list of those with whom he must stay
   and whom he must see in passing, the monks knowing that one of their
   number was a niggard, and being at the same time desirous to cure his
   complaint, asked the saint to stay with him. He replied, "Do you wish
   me to inflict injury on you and annoyance on the brother?" The
   niggardly brother on hearing of this was ashamed, and with the
   strenuous support of all his brethren, at length obtained from the
   saint a reluctant promise to put his monastery on the roll of his
   resting places. Ten days after they came to him and found the keepers
   already on guard in the vineyard through which their course lay, to
   keep off all comers with stones and clods and slings. In the morning
   they all departed without having eaten a grape, while the old man
   smiled and pretended not to know what had happened.

   27. Once when they were being entertained by another monk whose name
   was Sabus (we must not of course give the name of the niggard, we may
   tell that of this generous man), because it was the Lord's day, they
   were all invited by him into the vineyard so that before the hour for
   food came they might relieve the toil of the journey by a repast of
   grapes. Said the saint, "Cursed be he who looks for the refreshment of
   the body before that of the soul. Let us pray, let us sing, let us do
   our duty to God, and then we will hasten to the vineyard." When the
   service was over, he stood on an eminence and blessed the vineyard and
   let his own sheep go to their pasture. Now those who partook were not
   less than three thousand. And whereas the whole vineyard had been
   estimated at a hundred flagons, within thirty days he made it worth
   three hundred. The niggardly brother gathered much less than usual, and
   he was grieved to find that even what he had turned to vinegar. The old
   man had predicted this to many brethren before it happened. He
   particularly abhorred such monks as were led by their lack of faith to
   hoard for the future, and were careful about expense, or raiment, or
   some other of those things which pass away with the world.

   28. Lastly he would not even look at one of the brethren who lived
   about five miles off because he ascertained that he very jealously
   guarded his bit of ground, and had a little money. The offender wishing
   to be reconciled to the old man often came to the brethren, and in
   particular to Hesychius who was specially dear to Hilarion. One day
   accordingly he brought a bundle of green chick-pea just as it had been
   gathered. Hesychius placed it on the table against the evening,
   whereupon the old man cried out that he could not bear the stench, and
   asked where it came from. Hesychius replied that a certain brother had
   sent the brethren the first fruits of his ground. "Don't you notice,"
   said he, "the horrid stench, and detect the foul odour of avarice in
   the peas? Send it to the cattle, send to the brute-beasts and see
   whether they can eat it." No sooner was it in obedience to his command
   laid in the manger than the cattle in the wildest alarm and bellowing
   loudly broke their fastenings and fled in different directions. For the
   old man was enabled by grace to tell from the odour of bodies and
   garments, and the things which any one had touched, by what demon or
   with what vice the individual was distressed.

   29. His sixty-third year found the old man at the head of a grand
   monastery and a multitude of resident brethren. There were such crowds
   of persons constantly bringing those who suffered from various kinds of
   sickness or were possessed of unclean spirits, that the whole circuit
   of the wilderness was full of all sorts of people. And as the saint saw
   all this he wept daily and called to mind with incredible regret his
   former mode of life. When one of the brethren asked him why he was so
   dejected he replied, "I have returned again to the world and have
   received my reward in my lifetime. The people of Palestine and the
   adjoining province think me of some importance, and under pretence of a
   monastery for the well-ordering of the brethren I have all the
   apparatus of a paltry life about me." The brethren, however, kept watch
   over him and in particular Hesychius, who had a marvellously devoted
   affection and veneration for the old man. After he had spent two years
   in these lamentations Aristæneté the lady of whom we made mention
   before, as being then the wife of a prefect though without any of a
   prefect's ostentation, came to him intending to pay a visit to Antony
   also. He said to her, "I should like to go myself too if I were not
   kept a prisoner in this monastery, and if my going could be fruitful.
   For it is now two days since mankind was bereaved of him who was so
   truly a father to them all." She believed his word and stayed where she
   was: and after a few days the news came that Antony had fallen asleep.

   30. Some may wonder at the miracles he worked, or his incredible
   fasting, knowledge, and humility. Nothing so astonishes me as his power
   to tread under foot honour and glory. Bishops, presbyters, crowds of
   clergymen and monks, of Christian matrons even (a great temptation),
   and a rabble from all quarters in town and country were congregating
   about him, and even judges and others holding high positions, that they
   might receive at his hands the bread or oil which he had blessed. But
   he thought of nothing but solitude, so much so that one day he
   determined to be gone, and having procured an ass (he was almost
   exhausted with fasting and could scarcely walk) endeavoured to steal
   away. The news spread far and wide, and, just as if a public mourning
   for the desolation of Palestine were decreed, ten thousand people of
   various ages and both sexes came together to prevent his departure. He
   was unmoved by entreaties, and striking the sand with his stick kept
   saying: "I will not make my Lord a deceiver; I cannot look upon
   churches overthrown, Christ's altars trodden down, the blood of my sons
   poured out." All who were present began to understand that some secret
   had been revealed to him which he was unwilling to confess, but they
   none the less kept guard over him that he might not go. He therefore
   determined, and publicly called all to witness, that he would take
   neither food nor drink unless he were released. Only after seven days
   was he relieved from his fasting; when having bidden farewell to
   numerous friends, he came to Betilium attended by a countless
   multitude. There he prevailed upon the crowd to return and chose as his
   companions forty monks who had resources for the journey and were
   capable of travelling during fasting-time, that is, after sunset. He
   then visited the brethren who were in the neighbouring desert and
   sojourning at a place called Lychnos, and after three days came to the
   castle of Theubatus to see Dracontius, bishop and confessor, who was in
   exile there. The bishop was beyond measure cheered by the presence of
   so distinguished a man. At the end of another three days he set out for
   Babylon and arrived there after a hard journey. Then he visited Philo
   the bishop, who was also a confessor; for the Emperor Constantius who
   favoured the Arian heresy had transported both of them to those parts.
   Departing thence he came in three days to the town Aphroditon. There he
   met with a deacon Baisanes who kept dromedaries which were hired, on
   account of the scarcity of water in the desert, to carry travellers who
   wished to visit Antony. He then made known to the brethren that the
   anniversary of the blessed Antony's decease was at hand, and that he
   must spend a whole night in vigil in the very place where the saint had
   died. So then after three days journey through the waste and terrible
   desert they at length came to a very high mountain, and there found two
   monks, Isaac and Pelusianus, the former of whom had been one of
   Antony's attendants. [4028]

   31. The occasion seems a fitting one, since we are on the spot itself,
   to describe the abode of this great man. There is a high and rocky
   mountain extending for about a mile, with gushing springs amongst its
   spurs, the waters of which are partly absorbed by the sand, partly flow
   towards the plain and gradually form a stream shaded on either side by
   countless palms which lend much pleasantness and charm to the place.
   Here the old man might be seen pacing to and fro with the disciples of
   blessed Antony. Here, so they said, Antony himself used to sing, pray,
   work, and rest when weary. Those vines and shrubs were planted by his
   own hand: that garden bed was his own design. This pool for watering
   the garden was made by him after much toil. That hoe was handled by him
   for many years. Hilarion would lie upon the saint's bed and as though
   it were still warm would affectionately kiss it. The cell was square,
   its sides measuring no more than the length of a sleeping man. Moreover
   on the lofty mountaintop, the ascent of which was by a zig-zag path
   very difficult, were to be seen two cells of the same dimensions, in
   which he stayed when he escaped from the crowds of visitors or the
   company of his disciples. These were cut out of the live rock and were
   only furnished with doors. When they came to the garden, "You see,"
   said Isaac, "this garden with its shrubs and green vegetables; about
   three years ago it was ravaged by a troop of wild asses. One of their
   leaders was hidden by Antony to stand still while he thrashed the
   animal's sides with a stick and wanted to know why they devoured what
   they had not sown. And ever afterwards, excepting the water which they
   were accustomed to come and drink, they never touched anything, not a
   bush or a vegetable." The old man further asked to be shown his burial
   place, and they thereupon took him aside; but whether they showed him
   the tomb or not is unknown. It is related that the motive for secrecy
   was compliance with Antony's orders and to prevent Pergamius, a very
   wealthy man of the district, from removing the saint's body to his
   house and erecting a shrine to his memory.

   32. Having returned to Aphroditon and keeping with him only two of the
   brethren, he stayed in the neighbouring desert, and practised such
   rigid abstinence and silence that he felt that then for the first time
   he had begun to serve Christ. Three years had now elapsed since the
   heavens had been closed and the land had suffered from drought, and it
   was commonly said that even the elements were lamenting the death of
   Antony. Hilarion did not remain unknown to the inhabitants of that
   place any more than to others, but men and women with ghastly faces and
   wasted by hunger earnestly entreated the servant of Christ, as being
   the blessed Antony's successor, to give them rain. Hilarion when he saw
   them was strangely affected with compassion and, raising his eyes to
   heaven and lifting up both his hands, he at once obtained their
   petition. But, strange to say, that parched and sandy district, after
   the rain had fallen, unexpectedly produced such vast numbers of
   serpents and poisonous animals that many who were bitten would have
   died at once if they had not run to Hilarion. He therefore blessed some
   oil with which all the husbandmen and shepherds touched their wounds,
   and found an infallible cure.

   33. Seeing that even there surprising respect was paid to him, he went
   to Alexandria, intending to cross from thence to the farther oasis of
   the desert. And because he had never stayed in cities since he entered
   on the monk's life, he turned aside to some brethren at Bruchium, not
   far from Alexandria, whom he knew, and who welcomed the old man with
   the greatest pleasure. It was now night when all at once they heard his
   disciples saddling the ass and making ready for the journey. They
   therefore threw themselves at his feet and besought him not to leave
   them; they fell prostrate before the door, and declared they would
   rather die than lose such a guest. He answered: "My reason for
   hastening away is that I may not give you trouble. You will no doubt
   afterwards discover that I have not suddenly left without good cause."
   Next day the authorities of Gaza with the lictors of the prefect having
   heard of his arrival on the previous day, entered the monastery, and
   when they failed to find him anywhere they began to say to one another:
   "What we heard is true. He is a magician and knows the future." The
   fact was that the city of Gaza on Julian's accession to the throne,
   after the departure of Hilarion from Palestine and the destruction of
   his monastery, had presented a petition to the Emperor requesting that
   both Hilarion and Hesychius might be put to death, and a proclamation
   had been published everywhere that search should be made for them.

   34. Having then left Bruchium, he entered the oasis through the
   trackless desert, and there abode for a year, more or less. But,
   inasmuch as his fame had travelled thither also, he felt that he could
   not be hidden in the East, where he was known to many by report and by
   sight, and began to think of taking ship for some solitary island, so
   that having been exposed to public view by the land, he might at least
   find concealment in the sea. Just about that time Hadrian, his
   disciple, arrived from Palestine with information that Julian was slain
   and that a Christian emperor [4029] had commenced his reign; he ought
   therefore, it was said, to return to the relics of his monastery. But
   he, when he heard this, solemnly refused to return; and hiring a camel
   crossed the desert waste and reached Paretonium, a city on the coast of
   Libya. There the ill-starred Hadrian wishing to return to Palestine and
   unwilling to part with the renown so long attaching to his master's
   name, heaped reproaches upon him, and at last having packed up the
   presents which he had brought him from the brethren, set out without
   the knowledge of Hilarion. As I shall have no further opportunity of
   referring to this man, I would only record, for the terror of those who
   despise their masters, that after a little while he was attacked by the
   king's-evil [4030] and turned to a mass of corruption.

   35. The old man accompanied by Gazanus went on board a ship which was
   sailing to Sicily. Half way across the Adriatic he was preparing to pay
   his fare by selling a copy of the Gospels which he had written with his
   own hand in his youth, when the son of the master of the ship seized by
   a demon began to cry out and say: "Hilarion, servant of God, why is it
   that through you we cannot be safe even on the sea? Spare me a little
   until I reach land. Let me not be cast out here and thrown into the
   deep." The saint replied: "If my God permit you to remain, remain; but
   if He casts you out, why bring odium upon me a sinner and a beggar?"
   This he said that the sailors and merchants on board might not betray
   him on reaching shore. Not long after, the boy was cleansed, his father
   and the rest who were present having given their word that they would
   not reveal the name of the saint to any one.

   36. On approaching Pachynus, a promontory of Sicily, he offered the
   master the Gospel for the passage of himself and Gazanus. The man was
   unwilling to take it, all the more because he saw that excepting that
   volume and the clothes they wore they had nothing, and at last he swore
   he would not take it. But the aged saint, ardent and confident in the
   consciousness of his poverty, rejoiced exceedingly that he had no
   worldly possessions and was accounted a beggar by the people of the
   place.

   37. Once more, on thinking the matter over and fearing that merchants
   coming from the East might make him known, he fled to the interior,
   some twenty miles from the sea, and there on an abandoned piece of
   ground, every day tied up a bundle of firewood which he laid upon the
   back of his disciple, and sold at some neighbouring mansion. They thus
   supported themselves and were able to purchase a morsel of bread for
   any chance visitors. But that came exactly to pass which is written:
   [4031] "a city set on a hill cannot be hid." It happened that one of
   the shields-men [4032] who was vexed by a demon was in the basilica of
   the blessed Peter at Rome, when the unclean spirit within him cried
   out, "A few days ago Christ's servant Hilarion entered Sicily and no
   one knew him, and he thinks he is hidden. I will go and betray him."
   Immediately he embarked with his attendants in a ship lying in harbour,
   sailed to Pachynus and, led by the demon to the old man's hut, there
   prostrated himself and was cured on the spot. This, his first miracle
   in Sicily, brought the sick to him in countless numbers (but it brought
   also a multitude of religious persons); insomuch that one of the
   leading men who was swollen with the dropsy was cured the same day that
   he came. He afterwards offered the saint gifts without end, but the
   saint replied to him in the words of the Saviour to his disciples:
   [4033] "Freely ye received, freely give."

   38. While this was going on in Sicily Hesychius his disciple was
   searching the world over for the old man, traversing the coast,
   penetrating deserts, clinging all the while to the belief that wherever
   he was he could not long be hidden. At the end of three years he heard
   at Methona from a certain Jew, who dealt in old-clothes, that a
   Christian prophet had appeared in Sicily, and was working such miracles
   and signs, one might think him one of the ancient saints. So he asked
   about his dress, gait, and speech, and in particular his age, but could
   learn nothing. His informant merely declared that he had heard of the
   man by report. He therefore crossed the Adriatic and after a prosperous
   voyage came to Pachynus, where he took up his abode in a cottage on the
   shore of the bay, and, on inquiring for tidings of the old man,
   discovered by the tale which every one told him where he was, and what
   he was doing. Nothing about him surprised them all so much as the fact
   that after such great signs and wonders he had not accepted even a
   crust of bread from any one in the district. And, to cut my story
   short, the holy man Hesychius fell down at his master's knees and
   bedewed his feet with tears; at length he was gently raised by him, and
   when two or three days had been spent in talking over matters, he
   learned from Gazanus that Hilarion no longer felt himself able to live
   in those parts, but wanted to go to certain barbarous races where his
   name and fame were unknown.

   39. He therefore brought him to Epidaurus, [4034] a town in Dalmatia,
   where he stayed for a few days in the country near, but could not be
   hid. An enormous serpent, of the sort which the people of those parts
   call boas [4035] because they are so large that they often swallow
   oxen, was ravaging the whole province far and wide, and was devouring
   not only flocks and herds, but husbandmen and shepherds who were drawn
   in by the force of its breathing. He ordered a pyre to be prepared for
   it, then sent up a prayer to Christ, called forth the reptile, bade it
   climb the pile of wood, and then applied the fire. And so before all
   the people he burnt the savage beast to ashes. But now he began
   anxiously to ask what he was to do, whither to betake himself. Once
   more he prepared for flight, and in thought ranged through solitary
   lands, grieving that his miracles could speak of him though his tongue
   was silent.

   40. At that time there was an earthquake over the whole world,
   following on the death of Julian, which caused the sea to burst its
   bounds, and left ships hanging on the edge of mountain steeps. It
   seemed as though God were threatening a second deluge, or all things
   were returning to original chaos. When the people of Epidaurus saw
   this, I mean the roaring waves and heaving waters and the swirling
   billows mountain-high dashing on the shore, fearing that what they saw
   had happened elsewhere might befall them and their town be utterly
   destroyed, they made their way to the old man, and as if preparing for
   a battle placed him on the shore. After making the sign of the cross
   three times on the sand, he faced the sea, stretched out his hands, and
   no one would believe to what a height the swelling sea stood like a
   wall before him. It roared for a long time as if indignant at the
   barrier, then little by little sank to its level. Epidaurus and all the
   region roundabout tell the story to this day, and mothers teach their
   children to hand down the remembrance of it to posterity. Verily, what
   was said to the Apostles, [4036] "If ye have faith, ye shall say to
   this mountain, Remove into the sea, and it shall be done," may be even
   literally fulfilled, provided one has such faith as the Lord commanded
   the Apostles to have. For what difference does it make whether a
   mountain descends into the sea, or huge mountains of waters everywhere
   else fluid suddenly become hard as rock at the old man's feet?

   41. The whole country marvelled and the fame of the great miracle was
   in everyone's mouth, even at Salonæ. [4037] When the old man knew this
   was the case he escaped secretly by night in a small cutter, and
   finding a merchant ship after two days came to Cyprus. Between [4038]
   Malea and [4039] Cythera, the pirates, who had left on the shore that
   part of their fleet which is worked by poles instead of sails, bore
   down on them with two light vessels of considerable size; and besides
   this they were buffeted by the waves on every side. All the rowers
   began to be alarmed, to weep, to leave their places, to get out their
   poles, and, as though one message was not enough, again and again told
   the old man that pirates were at hand. Looking at them in the distance
   he gently smiled, then turned to his disciples and said, [4040] "O ye
   of little faith, wherefore do ye doubt? Are these more than the army of
   Pharaoh? Yet they were all drowned by the will of God." Thus he spake,
   but none the less the enemy with foaming prows kept drawing nearer and
   were now only a stone's throw distant. He stood upon the prow of the
   vessel facing them with out-stretched hand, and said, "Thus far and no
   farther." Marvellous to relate, the boats at once bounded back, and
   though urged forward by the oars fell farther and farther astern. The
   pirates were astonished to find themselves going back, and laboured
   with all their strength to reach the vessel, but were carried to the
   shore faster by far than they came.

   42. I pass by the rest for fear I should seem in my history to be
   publishing a volume of miracles. I will only say this, that when
   sailing with a fair wind among the Cyclades he heard the voices of
   unclean spirits shouting in all directions from towns and villages, and
   running in crowds to the shore. Having then entered Paphos, the city of
   Cyprus renowned in the songs of the poets, the ruins of whose temples
   after frequent earthquakes are the only evidences at the present day of
   its former grandeur, he began to live in obscurity about two miles from
   the city, and rejoiced in having a few days rest. But not quite twenty
   days passed before throughout the whole island whoever had unclean
   spirits began to cry out that Hilarion Christ's servant had come, and
   that they must go to him with all speed. Salamis, Curium, Lapetha, and
   the other cities joined in the cry, while many declared that they knew
   Hilarion and that he was indeed the servant of Christ, but where he was
   they could not tell. So within a trifle more than thirty days, about
   two hundred people, both men and women, came together to him. When he
   saw them he lamented that they would not suffer him to be quiet, and
   thirsting in a kind of manner to avenge himself, he lashed them with
   such urgency of prayer that some immediately, others after two or three
   days, all within a week, were cured.

   43. Here he stayed two years, always thinking of flight, and in the
   meantime sent Hesychius, who was to return in the spring, to Palestine
   to salute the brethren and visit the ashes of his monastery. When the
   latter returned he found Hilarion longing to sail again to Egypt, that
   is to the locality called [4041] Bucolia; but he persuaded him that,
   since there were no Christians there, but only a fierce and barbarous
   people, he should rather go to a spot in Cyprus itself which was higher
   up and more retired. After long and diligent search he found such a
   place twelve miles from the sea far off among the recesses of rugged
   mountains, the ascent to which could hardly be accomplished by creeping
   on hands and knees. Thither he conducted him. The old man entered and
   gazed around. It was indeed a lonely and terrible place; for though
   surrounded by trees on every side, with water streaming from the brow
   of the hill, a delightful bit of garden, and fruit-trees in abundance
   (of which, however, he never ate), yet it had close by the ruins of an
   ancient temple from which, as he himself was wont to relate and his
   disciples testify, the voices of such countless demons re-echoed night
   and day, that you might have thought there was an army of them. He was
   highly pleased at the idea of having his opponents in the
   neighbourhood, and abode there five years, cheered in these his last
   days by the frequent visits of Hesychius, for owing to the steep and
   rugged ascent, and the numerous ghosts (so the story ran), nobody or
   scarcely anybody either could or dared to go up to him. One day,
   however, as he was leaving his garden, he saw a man completely
   paralysed lying in front of the gates. He asked Hesychius who he was,
   or how he had been brought. Hesychius replied that he was the agent at
   the country-house to which the garden belonged in which they were
   located. Weeping much and stretching out his hand to the prostrate man
   he said, "I bid you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ arise and
   walk." The words were still on the lips of the speaker, when, with
   miraculous speed, the limbs were strengthened and the man arose and
   stood firm. Once this was noised abroad the need of many overcame even
   the pathless journey and the dangers of the place. The occupants of all
   the houses round about had nothing so much in their thoughts as to
   prevent the possibility of his escape, a rumour having spread
   concerning him to the effect that he could not stay long in the same
   place. This habit of his was not due to levity or childishness, but to
   the fact that he shunned the worry of publicity and praise, and always
   longed for silence and a life of obscurity.

   44. In his eightieth year, during the absence of Hesychius, he wrote by
   way of a will a short letter with his own hand, and left him all his
   riches (that is to say, a copy of the gospels, and his sack-cloth
   tunic, cowl and cloak), for his servant had died a few days before.
   Many devout men therefore came to the invalid from Paphos, and
   specially because they had heard of his saying that he must soon
   migrate to the Lord and must be liberated from the bonds of the body.
   There came also Constantia a holy woman whose son-in-law and daughter
   he had anointed with oil and saved from death. He earnestly entreated
   them all not to let him be kept even a moment of time after death, but
   to bury him immediately in the same garden, just as he was, clad in his
   goat-hair tunic, cowl, and his peasant's cloak.

   45. His body was now all but cold, and nought was left of life but
   reason. Yet with eyes wide open he kept repeating, "Go forth, what do
   you fear? Go forth, my soul, why do you hesitate? You have served
   Christ nearly seventy years, and do you fear death?" Thus saying he
   breathed his last. He was immediately buried before the city heard of
   his death.

   46. When the holy man Hesychius heard of his decease, he went to Cyprus
   and, to lull the suspicions of the natives who were keeping strict
   guard, pretended that he wished to live in the same garden, and then in
   the course of about ten months, though at great peril to his life,
   stole the saint's body. He carried it to Majuma; and there all the
   monks and crowds of towns-folk going in procession laid it to rest in
   the ancient monastery. His tunic, cowl and cloak, were uninjured; the
   whole body as perfect as if alive, and so fragrant with sweet odours
   that one might suppose it to have been embalmed.

   47. In bringing my book to an end I think I ought not to omit to
   mention the devotion of the holy woman Constantia who, when a message
   was brought her that Hilarion's body was in Palestine, immediately
   died, proving even by death the sincerity of her love for the servant
   of God. For she was accustomed to spend whole nights in vigil at his
   tomb, and to converse with him as if he were present in order to
   stimulate her prayers. Even at the present day one may see a strange
   dispute between the people of Palestine and the Cypriotes, the one
   contending that they have the body, the other the spirit of Hilarion.
   And yet in both places great miracles are wrought daily, but to a
   greater extent in the garden of Cyprus, perhaps because that spot was
   dearest to him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4017] See life of Paulus above.

   [4018] Matt. xi. 18.

   [4019] Luke xiv. 33.

   [4020] Isa. xiv. 14.

   [4021] 2 Thess. iii. 10.

   [4022] Exod. xv. 1.

   [4023] Ps. xx. 7.

   [4024] Luke v. 31.

   [4025] He was also the god of agricultural fertility. The festival of
   the Consualia, supposed to have been instituted by Romulus, was on
   August 21.

   [4026] Or secretary--Candidatus, a quæstor appointed by the Emperor to
   read his rescripts, etc.

   [4027] Matt. viii. and Mark v.

   [4028] Interpres. Probably one who spoke for him to the people, as
   Elijah had Elisha as his attendant.

   [4029] Jovian, a.d., 363-4.

   [4030] Morbo regio. The dictionaries give "jaundice" as the meaning,
   but it is universally used in modern times for scrofula. Here it seems
   to mean leprosy.

   [4031] Matt. v. 14.

   [4032] Scutarius, one of a corps of guards, whose prominent weapons
   were shields.

   [4033] Matt. x. 8.

   [4034] More properly in Argolis. It was the native town of Æsculapius,
   who was worshipped under the form of a serpent.

   [4035] Boas because they can swallow oxen (boves).

   [4036] Matt. xvii. 20 sq.

   [4037] In Dalmatia, three miles from Diocletian's great palace
   (Spalatro).

   [4038] The southern promontory of Greece.

   [4039] Now Cerigo.

   [4040] Matt. xiv. 32.

   [4041] Probably the place which gave its name to one of the mouths of
   the Nile (Bucolicum).
     __________________________________________________________________
