# source: Fathers/English/NPNF1/Volume VI.   Sermon on the Mount, Harmony of the Gospels, Homilies on the Gospels
# series: NPNF1
# volume: Volume VI.
# father: augustine
# work: Sermons on Selected Lessons of the New Testament
# latin_match_candidate: (none)
# extracted: 2026-09-01
# note: Public-domain Schaff English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
sermons on selected lessons of the new testament.

   ------------------------

   Sermon I.

   [LI. Benedictine Edition.]

   Of the agreement of the evangelists Matthew and Luke in the generations
   of the Lord.

   1. May He, beloved, fulfil your expectation who hath awakened it: for
   though I feel confident that what I have to say is not my own, but
   God's, yet with far more reason do I say, what the Apostle in his
   humility saith, "We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
   excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us." [1685] I do not
   doubt accordingly that you remember my promise; in Him I made it
   through whom I now fulfil it, for both when I made the promise, did I
   ask of the Lord, and now when I fulfil it, do I receive of Him. Now you
   will remember, beloved, that it was in the matins of the festival of
   the Lord's Nativity, that I put off the question which I had proposed
   for resolution, because many came with us to the celebration of the
   accustomed solemnities of that day to whom the word of God is usually
   burdensome; but now I imagine that none have come here, but they who
   desire to hear, and so I am not speaking to hearts that are deaf, and
   to minds that will disdain the word, but this your longing expectation
   is a prayer for me. There is a further consideration; for the day of
   the public shows [1686] has dispersed many from hence, for whose
   salvation I exhort you to share my great anxiety, and do you with all
   earnestness of mind, entreat God for those who are not yet intent upon
   the spectacles of the truth, but are wholly given up to the spectacles
   of the flesh; for I know and am well assured, that there are now among
   you those who have this day despised them, and have burst the bonds of
   their inveterate habits; for men are changed both for the better and
   the worse. By daily instances of this kind are we alternately made
   joyful and sad; we joy over the reformed, are sad over the corrupted;
   and therefore the Lord doth not say that he who beginneth, shall be
   saved, "But he that endureth unto the end shall be saved." [1687]

   2. Now what more marvellous, what more magnificent thing could our Lord
   Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and also the Son of man (for this also He
   vouchsafed to be), grant to us, than the gathering into His fold not
   only of the spectators of these foolish shows, but even some of the
   actors in them; for He hath combated [1688] unto salvation not only the
   lovers of the combats of men with beasts, but even the combatants
   themselves, for He also was made a spectacle Himself. Hear how. He hath
   told us Himself, and foretold it before He was made a spectacle, and in
   the words of prophecy announced beforehand what was to come to pass, as
   if it were already done, saying in the Psalms, "They pierced My hands
   and My feet, they told all My bones." [1689] Lo! how He was made a
   spectacle, for His bones to be told! and this spectacle He expresseth
   more plainly, "they observed and looked upon Me." He was made a
   spectacle and an object of derision, made a spectacle by them who were
   to show Him no favour indeed in that spectacle, but who were to be
   furious against Him, just as at first He made His martyrs spectacles;
   as saith the Apostle, "We are made a spectacle unto the world, and to
   angels, and to men." [1690] Now two sorts of men are spectators of such
   spectacles; the one, carnal, the other, spiritual men. The carnal look
   on, as thinking those martyrs who are thrown to the beasts, or
   beheaded, or burnt in the flames, to be wretched men, and they detest
   and abhor them; but others look on, like the holy Angels, not regarding
   the laceration of their bodies, but admiring the unimpaired purity of
   their faith. A grand spectacle to the eyes of the heart doth a whole
   mind in a mangled body exhibit! When these things are read of in the
   church, you behold them with pleasure with these eyes of the heart, for
   if you were to behold nothing, you would hear nothing; so you see you
   have not neglected the spectacles to-day, but have made a choice of
   spectacles. May God then be with you, and give you grace with gentle
   persuasiveness to report your spectacles to your friends, whom you have
   been pained to see this day running to the amphitheatre, and unwilling
   to come to the church; that so they too may begin to contemn those
   things, by the love of which themselves have become contemptible, and
   may, with you, love God, of whom none who love Him can ever be ashamed,
   for that they love Him who cannot be overcome: let them, as you do,
   love Christ, who by that very thing wherein He seemed to be overcome,
   overcame the whole world. For He hath overcome the whole world as we
   see, my brethren; He hath subjected all powers, He hath subjugated
   kings, not with the pride of soldiery, but by the ignominy of the
   Cross: not by the fury of the sword, but by hanging on the Wood, by
   suffering in the body, by working in the Spirit. [1691] His body was
   lifted up on the Cross, and so He subdued souls to the Cross; and now
   what jewel in their diadem is more precious than the Cross of Christ on
   the foreheads of kings? In loving Him you will never be ashamed.
   Whereas from the amphitheatre how many return conquered, because those
   are conquered, for whom they are so madly interested! still more would
   they be conquered were they to conquer. For so would they be enslaved
   to the vain joy, to the exultation of a depraved desire, who are
   conquered by the very circumstance of running to these shows. For how
   many, my brethren, do you think have this day been in hesitation
   whether they would go here or there? And they who in this hesitation,
   turning their thoughts to Christ, have run to the church, have
   overcome, not any man, but the devil himself, him that hunteth [1692]
   after the souls of the whole world. But they who in that hesitation
   have chosen rather to run to the amphitheatre, have assuredly been
   overcome by him whom the others overcame--overcame in Him who saith,
   "Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world." [1693] For the Captain
   suffered Himself to be tried, only that He might teach His soldiers to
   fight.

   3. That our Lord Jesus Christ might do this He became the Son of man by
   being born of a woman. But now, "would He have been any less a man, if
   He had not been born of the Virgin Mary" one may say. "He willed to be
   a man; well and good; He might have so been, and yet not be born of a
   woman; for neither did He make the first man whom He made, of a woman."
   Now see what answer I make to this. You say, Why did He choose to be
   born of a woman? I answer, Why should He avoid being born of a woman?
   Granted that I could not show that He chose to be born of a woman; do
   you show why He need have avoided it. But I have already said at other
   times, that if He had avoided the womb of a woman, it might have
   betokened, as it were, that He could have contracted defilement from
   her; but by how much He was in His own substance more incapable of
   defilement, by so much less had He cause to fear the woman's womb, as
   though He could contract defilement from it. But by being born of a
   woman, He purposed to show to us some high mystery. [1694] For of a
   truth, brethren, we grant too, that if the Lord had willed to become
   man without being born of a woman, it were easy to His sovereign
   Majesty. For as He could be born of a woman without a man, so could He
   also have been born without the woman. But this hath He shown us, that
   mankind of neither sex might despair of its salvation, for the human
   sexes are male and female. If therefore being a man, which it behoved
   Him assuredly to be, He had not been born of a woman, women might have
   despaired of themselves, as mindful of their first sin, because by a
   woman was the first man deceived, and would have thought that they had
   no hope at all in Christ. He came therefore as a man to make special
   choice of that sex, and was born of a woman to console the female sex,
   as though He would address them and say; "That ye may know that no
   creature of God is bad, but that [1695] unregulated pleasure perverteth
   it, when in the beginning I made man, I made them male and female. I do
   not condemn the creature which I made. See I have been born a Man, and
   born of a woman; it is not then the creature which I made that I
   condemn, but the sins which I made not." Let each sex then at once see
   its honour, and confess its iniquity, and let them both hope for
   salvation. The poison to deceive man was presented him by woman,
   through woman let salvation for man's recovery be presented; so let the
   woman make amends for the sin by which she deceived the man, by giving
   birth to Christ. For the same reason again, women were the first who
   announced to the Apostles the Resurrection of God. The woman in
   Paradise announced death to her husband, and the women in the Church
   announced salvation to the men; the Apostles were to announce to the
   nations the Resurrection of Christ, the women announced it to the
   Apostles. Let no one then reproach Christ with His birth of a woman, by
   which sex the Deliverer could not be defiled, and to which it was in
   the purpose [1696] of the Creator to do honour. [1697]

   4. But, say they, "how are we to believe that Christ was born of a
   woman?" I would answer, by the Gospel which hath been preached and is
   still preached to all the world. But these men, blind themselves, and
   aiming to blind others, seeing not what they ought to see, whilst they
   try to shake what ought to be believed, endeavour to obtrude a question
   on a matter which is now believed through all the earth. For they
   answer and say: "Do not think to overwhelm us with the authority of the
   whole world--let us look to Scripture itself, urge not arguments of
   mere [1698] numbers against us, for the seduced multitude favours you."
   To this I answer, in the first place, "Does the seduced multitude
   favour me?" This multitude was once a scantling. Whence grew this
   multitude, which in this increase was announced so long before? For
   this which hath been seen to increase, is none other than the same
   which was seen beforehand. I need not have said, it was a scantling;
   once it was Abraham only. Consider, brethren; it was Abraham alone
   throughout all the world at that time; throughout the whole world,
   among all men, and all nations; Abraham alone to whom it was said, "In
   thy seed shall all nations be blessed;" [1699] and what he alone
   believed of his own [1700] single person, is exhibited as present now
   to many in the multitude of his seed. Then it was not seen, and was
   believed; now it is seen, and it is contested; and what was then said
   to one man, and was by that one believed, is disputed now by some few,
   when in many it is made good. He who made His disciples fishers of men,
   inclosed within His nets every kind of authority. If great numbers are
   to be believed, what more widely diffused over the whole world than the
   Church? If the rich are to be believed, let them consider how many rich
   He hath taken; if the poor, let them consider the thousands of poor; if
   nobles, almost all the nobility are within the Church; if kings, let
   them see all of them subjected to Christ; if the more eloquent, and
   wise, and learned, let them see how many orators, and scientific [1701]
   men, and philosophers of this world, have been caught by those
   fishermen, to be drawn from the depth to salvation; let them think of
   Him who, coming down to heal by the example of His own humility that
   great evil of man's soul, pride, "chose the weak things of the world to
   confound the things which are mighty, and the foolish things of the
   world to confound the wise" (not the really wise, but who seemed so to
   be), "and chose the base things of the world, and things which are not,
   to bring to nought things that are." [1702]

   5. "Whatever you may choose to say," they say, "we find that in the
   place where we read that Christ was born, the Gospels disagree with one
   another, and two things which disagree cannot both be true;" for, says
   one, "when I have proved this disagreement, I may rightly disallow
   belief in it, or, at least, do you who accept the belief in it, shew
   the agreement." And what disagreement, I ask, will you prove? "A plain
   one," says he, "which none can gainsay." With what security, brethren,
   do you hear all this, because ye are believers! Attend, dearly beloved,
   and see what wholesome advice the Apostle gives, who says, "As ye have
   therefore received Christ Jesus our Lord, so walk ye in Him, rooted and
   built up in Him, and established in the faith;" [1703] for with this
   simple and assured faith ought we to abide stedfastly in Him, that He
   may Himself open to the faithful what is hidden in Him; for as the same
   Apostle saith, "In Him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
   knowledge;" [1704] and He does not hide them to refuse them, but to
   stir up desire for those hidden things. This is the advantage of their
   secrecy. Honour in Him then what as yet thou understandest not, and so
   much the more as the veils which thou seest are more in number: for the
   higher in honour any one is, the more veils are suspended in his
   palace. The veils make that which is kept secret honoured, and to those
   who honour it, the veils are lifted up; but as for those who mock at
   the veils, they are driven away from even approaching them. Because
   then we "turn unto Christ, the veil is taken away." [1705]

   6. They bring forward then their cavillings, [1706] and say, "You allow
   Matthew is an Evangelist." We answer: Yes indeed, with a godly
   confession, and a heart devout, in neither having any doubt at all, we
   answer plainly, Matthew is an Evangelist. "Do you believe him?" they
   say. Who will not answer, I do? How clear an assent doth that your
   godly murmur convey! So, brethren, you believe it in all assurance; you
   have no cause to blush for it. I am speaking to you, who was once
   deceived, when as in my early boyhood I chose to bring to the divine
   Scriptures a subtlety of criticising before the godly temper of one who
   was seeking truth: by my irregular [1707] life I shut the gate of my
   Lord against myself: when I should have knocked for it to be opened, I
   went on so as to make it more closely shut, for I dared to search in
   pride for that which none but the humble can discover. How much more
   blessed now are you, with what sure confidence do you learn, and in
   what safety, who are still young ones in the nest of faith, and receive
   the spiritual food; whereas I, wretch that I was, as thinking myself
   fit to fly, left the nest, and fell down before I flew: but the Lord of
   mercy raised me up, that I might not be trodden down to death by
   passers by, and put me in the nest again; for those same things then
   troubled me, which now in quiet security I am proposing and explaining
   to you in the Name of the Lord.

   7. As then I had begun to say, thus do they cavil. "Matthew," say they,
   "is an Evangelist, and you believe him?" Immediately that we
   acknowledge him to be an Evangelist, we necessarily believe him. Attend
   then to the generations of Christ, which Matthew has set down. "The
   book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the son of
   Abraham." [1708] How the Son of David, and the Son of Abraham? He could
   not be shown to be so, but by the succession of generations; for
   certain it is that when the Lord was born of the Virgin Mary, neither
   Abraham nor David was in this world, and dost thou say that the same
   man is both the Son of David, and the Son of Abraham? Let us, as it
   were, say to Matthew, Prove thy word, for I am waiting for the
   succession of the generations of Christ. "Abraham begat Isaac; and
   Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren; and Judas
   begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom
   begat Aram; and Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat Naasson; and
   Naasson begat Salmon; and Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat
   Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse; and Jesse begat David the king."
   [1709] Now observe how from this point the genealogy is brought down
   from David to Christ, who is called the Son of Abraham, and the Son of
   David. "And David begat Solomon, of her that had been the wife of
   Urias; and Solomon begat Roboam; and Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat
   Asa; and Asa begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat
   Ozias; and Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz
   begat Ezekias; and Ezekias begat Manasses; and Manasses begat Amon; and
   Amon begat Josias; and Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about
   the time they were carried away to Babylon; and after the carrying away
   into Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel;
   and Zorobabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim begat
   Azor; and Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim begat
   Eliud; and Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Matthan; and Matthan
   begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was
   born Jesus, who is called Christ." Thus then by the order and
   succession of fathers and forefathers, Christ is found to be the Son of
   David, and the Son of Abraham.

   8. Now upon this thus faithfully narrated, the first cavil they bring
   is, that the same Matthew goes on to say, "All the generations from
   Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from David until the
   carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations; and from the
   carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations." Then
   in order to tell us how Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, he went on
   and said, "Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise;" [1710] for
   by the line of the generations he had showed why Christ is called the
   Son of David, and the Son of Abraham. But now it needed to be shown how
   He was born and appeared among men: and so there follows immediately
   that narrative, by means of which we believe that our Lord Jesus Christ
   was not only born of the everlasting God, coeternal with Him who begat
   Him before all times, before all creation, by whom all things were
   made; but was also now born from the Holy Ghost, of the Virgin Mary,
   which we confess equally with the other; for you remember and know (for
   I am speaking to Catholics, to my brethren), that this is our faith,
   that this we profess and confess; for this faith thousands of martyrs
   have been slain in all the world.

   9. This also which follows they like to laugh at, whose wish it is to
   destroy the authority of the Evangelical books, that they may show as
   it were that we have without any good reason believed what is said,
   "When as His mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came
   together, she was found with Child of the Holy Ghost. Then Joseph her
   husband being a just man, and not willing to make her a public example,
   was minded to put her away privily;" [1711] for because he knew that
   she was not with child by him, he thought that she was so to say [1712]
   necessarily an adulteress. "Being a just man," as the Scripture saith,
   "and not willing to make her a public example," (that is, to divulge
   the matter, for so it is in many copies), "he was minded to put her
   away privily." The husband indeed was in trouble, but as being a just
   man he deals not severely; for so great justice is ascribed to this
   man, as that he neither wished to keep an adulterous wife, nor could
   bring himself [1713] to punish and expose her. "He was minded to put
   her away privily," because he was not only unwilling to punish, but
   even to betray her; and mark his genuine justice; for he did not wish
   to spare her, because he had a desire to keep her; for many spare their
   adulterous wives through a carnal love, choosing to keep them even
   though adulterous, that they may enjoy them through a carnal desire.
   But this just man has no wish to keep her, and so does not love in any
   carnal sort; and yet he does not wish to punish her; and so in his
   mercy he spares her. How truly just a man is this! He would neither
   keep an adulteress, lest he should seem to spare her because of an
   impure affection, and yet he would not punish or betray her. Deservedly
   indeed was he chosen for the witness of his wife's virginity: and so he
   who was in trouble through human infirmity, was assured by Divine
   authority.

   10. For the Evangelist goes on to say, "While he thought on these
   things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in sleep,
   saying, Joseph, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for That
   which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. [1714] And she shall
   bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus." Why Jesus? "for
   He shall save His people from their sins." [1715] It is well known
   then, that "Jesus" in the Hebrew tongue is in Latin interpreted
   "Saviour," which we see from this very explanation of the name; for as
   if it had been asked, "Why Jesus?" he subjoined immediately as
   explaining the reason of the word, "for He shall save His people from
   their sins." This then we religiously believe, this most firmly hold
   fast, that Christ was born by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary.

   11. What then do our adversaries say? "If," says one, "I shall discover
   a lie, surely you will not then believe it all; and such I have
   discovered." Let us see: I will reckon up the generations; for by their
   slanderous cavillings they invite and bring us to this. Yes, if we live
   religiously, if we believe Christ, if we do not desire to fly out of
   the nest before the time, they only bring us to this--to the knowledge
   of mysteries. Mark then, holy brethren, [1716] the usefulness of
   heretics; their usefulness, that is, in respect of the designs of God,
   who makes a good use even of those that are bad; whereas, as regards
   themselves, the fruit of their own designs is rendered to them, and not
   that good which God brings out of them. Just as in the case of Judas;
   what great good did he! By the Lord's Passion all nations are saved;
   but that the Lord might suffer, Judas betrayed Him. God then both
   delivers the nations by the Passion of His Son, and punishes Judas for
   his own wickedness. For the mysteries which lie hid in Scripture, no
   one who is content with the simplicity of the faith would curiously
   sift them, and therefore as no one would sift them, no one would
   discover them but for cavillers who force us. For when heretics cavil,
   the little ones are disturbed; when disturbed, they make search, and
   their search is, so to say, a beating of the head at the mother's
   breasts, that they may yield as much milk as is sufficient for these
   little ones. They search then, because they are troubled; but they who
   know and have learnt these things, because they have investigated them,
   and God hath opened to their knocking, they in their turn open to those
   who are in trouble. And so it happens that heretics serve usefully for
   the discovery of the truth, whilst they cavil to seduce men into error.
   For with less carefulness would truth be sought out, if it had not
   lying adversaries; "For there must be also heresies among you," and as
   though we should enquire the cause, he immediately subjoined, "that
   they which are approved may be made manifest among you." [1717]

   12. What then is it that they say? "See; Matthew enumerates the
   generations, and says, that "from Abraham to David are fourteen
   generations, and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are
   fourteen generations, and from the carrying away into Babylon unto
   Christ are fourteen generations." Now three times fourteen make
   forty-two; yet they number them, and find them forty-one generations,
   and immediately they bring up their cavilling and their insulting
   mockery, and say, "What means it, when in the Gospel it is said that
   there are three times fourteen generations, yet when they are numbered
   all together, they are found to be not forty-two, but forty-one?"
   Doubtless there is a great mystery [1718] here: and glad are we, and we
   give thanks unto the Lord, that by the occasion of cavillers we have
   discovered something which gives us in the discovery the more pleasure,
   in proportion to its obscurity when it was the object of search; for,
   as I have said before, we are exhibiting a spectacle to your minds.
   From Abraham then to David are fourteen generations: after that, the
   enumeration begins with Solomon, for David begat Solomon; the
   enumeration, I say, begins with Solomon, and reaches to Jechonias,
   during whose life the carrying away into Babylon took place; and so are
   there other fourteen generations, by reckoning in Solomon at the head
   of the second division, and Jechonias also, with whom that enumeration
   closes to fill up the number fourteen; and the third division begins
   with this same Jechonias.

   13. Give attention, holy brethren, to this circumstance, at once
   mysterious and pleasant; for I confess to you the feeling [1719] of my
   own heart, whereby I believe that when I have brought it forth, and you
   have got taste of it, you will give the same report of it. Attend then.
   In the third division, beginning from this Jechonias unto the Lord
   Jesus Christ, are found fourteen generations; for this Jechonias is
   reckoned twice, as the last of the former, and the first of the
   following division. "But why is Jechonias," one may say, "reckoned
   twice?" Nothing took place of old among the people of Israel, which was
   not a mysterious figure of things to come: and indeed it is not without
   good reason that Jechonias is reckoned twice, because if there be a
   boundary between two fields, be it a stone, or any dividing wall, both
   he who is on the one side measures up to that same wall, and he who is
   on the other takes the beginning of his measurement again from the
   same. But why this was not done in the first connecting link of the
   divisions, when we number from Abraham to David fourteen generations,
   and begin to reckon the fourteen others, not from David over again, but
   from Solomon, a reason must be given which contains an important
   mystery. [1720] Attend then. The carrying away into Babylon took place
   when Jechonias was appointed king in the room of his deceased father.
   The kingdom was taken from him, and another appointed in his room;
   still the carrying away unto the Gentiles took place during the
   lifetime of Jechonias, for no fault of Jechonias is mentioned for which
   he was deprived of the kingdom; but the sins rather of those who
   succeeded him are marked out. So then there follows the Captivity and
   the passing away into Babylon; and the wicked do not go alone, but the
   saints also go with them: for in that Captivity were the prophets
   Ezekiel and Daniel, and the Three Children who were cast into the
   flames, and so made famous. They all went according to the prophecy of
   the prophet Jeremiah.

   14. Remember then, that Jechonias, rejected without any fault of his,
   ceased to reign, and passed over unto the Gentiles, when the carrying
   away unto Babylon took place. Now observe the figure hereby manifested
   beforehand, of things to come in the Lord Jesus Christ. For the Jews
   would not that our Lord Jesus Christ should reign over them, yet found
   they no fault in Him. He was rejected in His own person, and in that of
   His servants also, and so they passed over unto the Gentiles as into
   Babylon in a figure. For this also did Jeremiah prophesy, that the Lord
   commanded them to go into Babylon: and whatever other prophets told the
   people not to go into Babylon, them he reproved as false prophets.
   [1721] Let those who read the Scriptures, remember this as we do; and
   let those who do not, give us credit. Jeremiah then on the part of God
   threatened those who would not go into Babylon, whereas to them who
   should go he promised rest there, and a sort of happiness in the
   cultivation of their vines, and planting of their gardens, and the
   abundance of their fruits. How then does the people of Israel, not now
   in figure but in verity, pass over unto Babylon? Whence came the
   Apostles? Were they not of the nation of the Jews? Whence came Paul
   himself? for he saith, "I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham,
   of the tribe of Benjamin." [1722] Many of the Jews then believed in the
   Lord; from them were the Apostles chosen; of them were the more than
   five hundred brethren, to whom it was vouchsafed [1723] to see the Lord
   after His resurrection; [1724] of them were the hundred and twenty in
   the house, [1725] when the Holy Ghost came down. But what saith the
   Apostle in the Acts of the Apostles, when the Jews refused the word of
   truth? "We were sent unto you, but seeing ye have rejected the word of
   God, lo! we turn unto the Gentiles." [1726] The true passing over then
   into Babylon, which was then prefigured in the time of Jeremiah, took
   place in the spiritual dispensation of the time of the Lord's
   Incarnation. But what saith Jeremiah of these Babylonians, to those who
   were passing over to them? "For in their peace shall be your peace."
   [1727] When Israel then passed over also into Babylon by Christ and the
   Apostles, that is, when the Gospel came unto the Gentiles, what saith
   the Apostle, as though by the mouth of Jeremiah of old? "I exhort
   therefore, that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions,
   and giving of thanks be made for all men. For kings, and for all that
   are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
   godliness and honesty." [1728] For they were not yet Christian kings,
   yet he prayed for them. Israel then praying in Babylon hath been heard;
   the prayers of the Church have been heard, and the kings have become
   Christian, and you see now fulfilled what was then spoken in figure;
   "In their peace shall be your peace," for they have received the peace
   of Christ, and have left off to persecute Christians, that now in the
   secure quiet of peace, the Churches might be built up, and peoples
   planted in the garden [1729] of God, and that all nations might bring
   forth fruit in faith, and hope, and love, which is in Christ.

   15. The carrying away into Babylon took place of old by Jechonias, who
   was not permitted to reign in the nation of the Jews, as a type of
   Christ, whom the Jews would not have reign over them. Israel passed
   over unto the Gentiles, that is, the preachers of the Gospel passed
   over unto the people of the Gentiles. What marvel then, that Jechonias
   is reckoned twice? for if he were a figure of Christ passing over from
   the Jews unto the Gentiles, consider only what Christ is between the
   Jews and Gentiles. Is He not that Corner-stone? In a corner-stone you
   see the end of one wall, and the beginning of another; up to that stone
   you measure one wall, and another from it; therefore the corner-stone
   which connects both walls is reckoned twice. Jechonias then as
   prefiguring the Lord was, as it were, a type of the corner-stone; and
   as Jechonias was not permitted to reign over the Jews, but they went
   unto Babylon, so Christ, "the stone which the builders rejected, is
   made the head of the corner," [1730] that the Gospel might reach unto
   the Gentiles. Hesitate not then to reckon the head of the corner twice,
   and you have at once the number written: and so there are fourteen in
   each of the three divisions, yet altogether the generations are not
   forty-two, but forty-one; for as when the order of the stones runs in a
   straight line, they are all reckoned but once, but when there is a
   deviation from the straight line to make an angle, that stone at which
   the deviation begins must be reckoned twice, because it belongs at once
   to that line which is finished at it, and to that other line which
   begins from it; so as long as the order of the generations continued in
   the Jewish people, it made no angle in the regular division of
   fourteen; but when the line was turned that the people might pass over
   into Babylon, a sort of angle as it were was made at Jechonias, so that
   it was necessary to reckon him twice, as the type of that adorable
   Corner-stone.

   16. They have another cavil. "The generations of Christ," say they,
   "are numbered through Joseph, and not through Mary." Attend awhile,
   holy brethren. "It ought not to be," they say, "through Joseph." And
   why not? Was not Joseph the husband of Mary? "No," they say. Who says
   so? For the Scripture saith by the authority of the Angel that he was
   her husband. "Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for That which
   is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost." [1731] Again, he was
   commanded to name the Child, though He was not born of his seed; "She
   shall bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus." [1732]
   Now the Scripture is intent on showing, that He was not born of
   Joseph's seed, when he is told in his trouble as to her being with
   child, "He is of the Holy Ghost;" and yet his paternal authority is not
   taken from him, forasmuch as he is commanded to name the Child; and
   again the Virgin Mary herself, who was well aware that it was not by
   him that she conceived Christ, yet calls him the father of Christ.

   17. Consider when this was. When the Lord Jesus, as to His Human
   Nature, was twelve years old [1733] (for as to His Divine Nature He is
   before all times, and without time), He tarried behind them in the
   temple, and disputed with the elders, and they wondered at His
   doctrine; and His parents who were returning from Jerusalem sought Him
   among their company, among those, that is, who were journeying with
   them, and when they found Him not, they returned in trouble to
   Jerusalem, and found Him disputing in the temple with the elders, when
   He was, as I said, twelve years old. But what wonder? The Word of God
   is never silent, though it is not always heard. He is found then in the
   temple, and His mother saith to Him, "Why hast Thou thus dealt with us?
   Thy father and I have sought Thee sorrowing;" and He said, "Wist ye not
   that I must be about My Father's service?" [1734] This He said for that
   the Son of God was in the temple of God, for that temple was not
   Joseph's, but God's. See, says some one, "He did not allow that He was
   the Son of Joseph." Wait, brethren, with a little patience, because of
   the press of time, that it may be long enough for what I have to say.
   When Mary had said, "Thy father and I have sought Thee sorrowing," He
   answered, "Wist ye not that I must be about My Father's service?" for
   He would not be their Son in such a sense, as not to be understood to
   be also the Son of God. For the Son of God He was--ever the Son of
   God--Creator even of themselves who spake to Him; but the Son of Man in
   time; born of a Virgin without the operation of her husband, yet the
   Son of both parents. Whence prove we this? Already have we proved it by
   the words of Mary, "Thy father and I have sought Thee sorrowing."

   18. Now in the first place for the instruction of the women, our
   sisters, such saintly modesty of the Virgin Mary must not be passed
   over, brethren. She had given birth to Christ--the Angel had come to
   her, and said, "Behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring
   forth a Son, and shalt call His name Jesus. [1735] He shall be great,
   and shall be called the Son of the Highest." [1736] She [1737] had been
   thought worthy to give birth to the Son of the Highest, yet was she
   most humble; nor did she put herself before her husband, even in the
   order of naming him, so as to say, "I and Thy father," but she saith,
   "Thy father and I." She regarded not the high honour [1738] of her
   womb, but the order of wedlock did she regard, for Christ the humble
   would not have taught His mother to be proud. "Thy father and I have
   sought Thee sorrowing." Thy father and I, she saith, "for the husband
   is the head of the woman." [1739] How much less then ought other women
   to be proud! for Mary herself also is called a woman, not from the loss
   of virginity, but by a form of expression peculiar to her country; for
   of the Lord Jesus the Apostle also said, "made of a woman," [1740] yet
   there is no interruption hence to the order and connection of our Creed
   [1741] wherein we confess "that He was born of the Holy Ghost and the
   Virgin Mary." For as a virgin she conceived Him, as a virgin brought
   Him forth, and a virgin she continued; but all females they called
   "women," [1742] by a peculiarity of the Hebrew tongue. Hear a most
   plain example of this. The first woman whom God made, having taken her
   out of the side of a man, was called a woman before she "knew" her
   husband, which we are told was not till after they went out of
   Paradise, for the Scripture saith, "He made her a woman." [1743]

   19. The answer then of the Lord Jesus Christ, "I must be about My
   Father's service," does not in such sense declare God to be His Father,
   as to deny that Joseph was His father also; And whence prove we this?
   By the Scripture, which saith on this wise, "And He said unto them,
   Wist ye not that I must be about My Father's service; but they
   understood not what He spake to them: and when He went down with them,
   He came to Nazareth, and was subject to them." [1744] It did not say,
   "He was subject to His mother," or was "subject to her," but "He was
   subject to them." To whom was He subject? was it not to His parents? It
   was to both His parents that He was subject, by the same condescension
   by which He was the Son of Man. A little way back women received their
   precepts. Now let children receive theirs--to obey their parents, and
   to be subject to them. The world was subject unto Christ, and Christ
   was subject to His parents.

   20. You see then, brethren, that He did not say, "I must needs be about
   My Father's service," in any such sense as that we should understand
   Him thereby to have said, "You are not My parents." They were His
   parents in time, God was His Father eternally. They were the parents of
   the Son of Man--"He," the Father of His Word, and Wisdom, and Power, by
   whom He made all things. But if all things were made by that Wisdom,
   "which reacheth from one end to another mightily, and sweetly ordereth
   all things," [1745] then were they also made by the Son of God to whom
   He Himself as Son of Man was afterwards to be subject; and the Apostle
   says that He is the Son of David, "who was made of the seed of David
   according to the flesh." [1746] But yet the Lord Himself proposes a
   question to the Jews, which the Apostle solves in these very words; for
   when he said, "who was made of the seed of David," he added, "according
   to the flesh," that it might be understood that He is not the Son of
   David according to His Divinity, but that the Son of God is David's
   Lord; for thus in another place, when He is setting forth the [1747]
   privileges of the Jewish people, the Apostle saith, "Whose are the
   fathers, of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, Who is over all,
   God blessed for ever." [1748] As, "according to the flesh," He is
   David's Son; but as being "God over all, blessed for ever," He is
   David's Lord. The Lord then saith to the Jews, "Whose Son say ye that
   Christ is?" They answered, "The Son of David." [1749] For this they
   knew, as they had learnt it easily from the preaching of the Prophets;
   and in truth, He was of the seed of David, "but according to the
   flesh," by the Virgin Mary, who was espoused to Joseph. When they
   answered then that Christ was David's Son, Jesus said to them, "How
   then doth David in spirit call Him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my
   Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand, till I put Thine enemies under Thy
   feet. [1750] If David then in spirit call Him Lord, how is He his Son?"
   [1751] And the Jews could not answer Him. So we have it in the Gospel.
   He did not deny that He was David's Son, so that they could not
   understand that He was also David's Lord. For they acknowledged in
   Christ that which He became in time, but they did not understand in Him
   what He was in all eternity. Wherefore wishing to teach them His
   Divinity, He proposed a question touching His Humanity; as though He
   would say, "You know that Christ is David's Son, answer Me, how He is
   also David's Lord?" And that they might not say, "He is not David's
   Lord," He introduced the testimony of David himself. And what doth he
   say? He saith indeed the truth. For you find God in the Psalms saying
   to David, "Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy seat." [1752]
   Here then He is the Son of David. But how is He the Lord of David, who
   is David's Son? "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on My right
   hand." [1753] Can you wonder that David's Son is his Lord, when you see
   that Mary was the mother of her Lord? He is David's Lord then as being
   God. David's Lord, as being Lord of all; and David's Son, as being the
   Son of Man. At once Lord and Son. David's Lord, "who, being in the form
   of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God;" [1754] and
   David's Son, in that "He emptied Himself, taking the form of a
   servant." [1755]

   21. Joseph then was not the less His father, because he knew not the
   mother of our Lord, as though concupiscence and not conjugal affection
   constitutes the marriage bond. [1756] Attend, holy brethren; Christ's
   Apostle was some time after this to say in the Church, "It remaineth
   that they that have wives be as though they had none." [1757] And we
   know many of our brethren bringing forth fruit through grace, who for
   the Name of Christ practise an entire restraint by mutual consent, who
   yet suffer no restraint of true conjugal affection. Yea, the more the
   former is repressed, the more is the other strengthened and confirmed.
   Are they then not married people who thus live, not requiring from each
   other any carnal gratification, or exacting the satisfaction [1758] of
   any bodily desire? And yet the wife is subject to the husband, because
   it is fitting that she should be, and so much the more in subjection is
   she, in proportion to her greater chastity; and the husband for his
   part loveth his wife truly, as it is written, "In honour and
   sanctification," [1759] as a coheir of grace: as "Christ," saith the
   Apostle, "loved the Church." [1760] If then this be a union, and a
   marriage; if it be not the less a marriage because nothing of that kind
   passes between them, which even with unmarried persons may take place,
   but then unlawfully; (O that all could live so, but many have not the
   power!) let them at least not separate those who have the power, and
   deny that the man is a husband or the woman a wife, because there is no
   fleshly intercourse, but only the union of hearts between them.

   22. Hence, my brethren, understand the sense of Scripture concerning
   those our ancient fathers, whose sole design in their marriage was to
   have children by their wives. For those even who, according to the
   custom of their time and nation, had a plurality of wives, lived in
   such chastity with them, as not to approach their bed, but for the
   cause I have mentioned, thus treating them indeed with honour. But he
   who exceeds the limits which this rule prescribes for the fulfilment of
   this end of marriage, acts contrary to the very contract [1761] by
   which he took his wife. The contract is read, read in the presence of
   all the attesting witnesses; and an express clause is there that they
   marry "for the procreation of children;" and this is called the
   marriage contract. [1762] If it was not for this that wives were given
   and taken to wife, what father could without blushing give up his
   daughter to the lust of any man? But now, that the parents may not
   blush, and that they may give their daughters in honourable marriage,
   not to shame, [1763] the contract is read out. And what is read from
   it?--the clause, "for the sake of the procreation of children." And
   when this is heard, the brow of the parent is cleared up and calmed.
   Let us consider again the feelings [1764] of the husband who takes his
   wife. The husband himself would blush to receive her with any other
   view, if the father would blush with any other view to give her.
   Nevertheless, if they cannot contain (as I have said on other
   occasions), let them require what is due, and let them not go to any
   others than those from whom it is due. Let both the woman and the man
   seek relief for their infirmity in themselves. Let not the husband go
   to any other woman, nor the woman to any other man, for from this
   adultery gets its name, as though it were "a going to another." [1765]
   And if they exceed the bounds of the marriage contract, let them not at
   least exceed those of conjugal fidelity. Is it not a sin in married
   persons to exact from one another more than this design of the
   "procreation of children" renders necessary? It is doubtless a sin,
   though a venial one. The Apostle saith, "But I speak this of
   allowance," [1766] when he was treating the matter thus. "Defraud ye
   not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may
   give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together again, that
   Satan tempt you not for your incontinency." [1767] What does this mean?
   That you do not impose upon yourselves any thing beyond your strength,
   that you do not by your mutual continence fall into adultery. "That
   Satan tempt you not for your incontinency." And that he might not seem
   to enjoin what he only allowed (for it is one thing to give precepts to
   strength of virtue, and another to make allowance to infirmity), he
   immediately subjoined; "But this I speak of allowance, not of
   commandment. For I would that all men were even as I myself." As though
   he would say, I do not command you to do this; but I pardon you if you
   do.

   23. So then, my brethren, give heed. Those famous men who marry wives
   only for the procreation of children, such as we read the Patriarchs to
   have been, and know it, by many proofs, by the clear and unequivocal
   testimony of the sacred books; whoever, I say, they are who marry wives
   for this purpose only, if the means could be given them of having
   children without intercourse with their wives, would they not with joy
   unspeakable embrace so great a blessing? would they not with great
   delight accept it? For there are two carnal operations by which mankind
   is preserved, to both of which the wise and holy descend as matter of
   duty, but the unwise rush headlong into them through lust; and these
   are very different things. Now what are these two things by which
   mankind is preserved? The first which is confined to ourselves and
   relates to taking nourishment (which cannot of course be taken without
   some gratification of the flesh), is eating and drinking; if you do not
   this you will die. By this one support then of eating and drinking does
   the race of man subsist, by a [1768] law of its nature. But by this men
   are only supported as far as themselves are concerned; for they do not
   provide for any succession by eating and drinking, but by marrying
   wives. For so is the race of man preserved; first, by the means of
   life; but because whatever care they exercise they cannot of course
   live for ever, there is a second provision made, that those who are
   newly born may replace those who die. For the race of man is, as it is
   written, like the leaves on a tree, or an olive, that is, or a laurel,
   or some tree of this sort, which is never without foliage, yet whose
   leaves are not always the same. [1769] For, as it is written, "it
   shooteth forth some, and casteth others," because those which sprout
   afresh replace the others as they fall, for the tree is ever casting
   its leaves, yet is ever clothed with leaves. So also the race of man
   feels not the loss of those who die day by day, because of the supply
   of those who are newly born; and thus the whole race of mankind is
   according to its own laws sustained, and as leaves are ever seen on the
   trees, so is the earth seen to be full of men. Whereas if they were
   only to die, and no fresh ones be born, the earth would be stripped of
   all its inhabitants, as certain trees are of all their leaves.

   24. Seeing then that the human race subsists in such sort, as that
   those two supports, of which enough has now been said, are necessary to
   it, the wise, and understanding, and the faithful man descends to both
   as matter of duty, and does not fall into them through lust. But how
   many are there who rush greedily to their eating and drinking, and make
   their whole life to consist in them, as if they were the very reason
   for living. For whereas men really eat to live, they think that they
   live to eat. These will every wise man condemn, and holy Scripture
   especially, all gluttons, drunkards, gormandizers, "whose god is their
   belly." [1770] Nothing but the lust of the flesh, and not the need of
   refreshment, carries them to the table. These then fall upon their meat
   and drink. But they who descend to them from the duty of maintaining
   life, do not live to eat, but eat to live. Accordingly, if the offer
   were made to these wise and temperate persons that they should live
   without food or drink, with what great joy would they embrace the boon!
   that now they might not even be forced to descend to that into which it
   had never been their custom to fall, but that they might be lifted up
   always in the Lord, and no necessity of repairing the wastings of their
   body might make them lay aside their fixed attention towards Him. How
   think ye that the holy Elias received the cruse of water, and the cake
   of bread, to satisfy him for forty days? [1771] With great joy no
   doubt, because he eat and drank to live, and not to serve his lust. But
   try to bring this about, if you could, for a man who, like the beast in
   his stall, places his whole blessedness and happiness in the table. He
   would hate your boon, and thrust it from him, and look upon it as a
   punishment. And so in that other duty of marriage, sensual men seek for
   wives only to satisfy their sensuality, and therefore at length are
   scarce contented even with their wives. And oh! I would that if they
   cannot or will not cure their sensuality, they would not suffer it to
   go beyond that limit which conjugal duty prescribes, I mean even that
   which is granted to infirmity. Nevertheless, if you were to say to such
   a man, "why do you marry?" he would answer perhaps for very shame, "for
   the sake of children." But if any one in whom he could have
   unhesitating credit were to say to him, "God is able to give, and yea,
   and will give you children without your having any intercourse with
   your wife;" he would assuredly be driven to confess that it was not for
   the sake of children that he was seeking for a wife. Let him then
   acknowledge his infirmity, and so receive that which he pretended to
   receive only as matter of duty.

   25. It was thus those holy men of former times, those men of God sought
   and wished for children. For this one end--the procreation of children,
   was their intercourse and union with their wives. It is for this reason
   that they were allowed to have a plurality of wives. For if
   immoderateness in these desires could be well-pleasing to God, it would
   have been as much allowed at that time for one woman to have many
   husbands, as one husband many wives. Why then had all chaste women no
   more than one husband, but one man had many wives, except that for one
   man to have many wives is a means to the multiplication of a family,
   whereas a woman would not give birth to more children, how many soever
   more husbands she might have. Wherefore, brethren, if our fathers'
   union and intercourse with their wives, was for no other end but the
   procreation of children, it had been great matter of joy to them, if
   they could have had children without that intercourse, since for the
   sake of having them they descended to that intercourse only through
   duty, and did not rush into it through lust. So then was Joseph not a
   father because he had gotten a son without any lust of the flesh? God
   forbid that Christian chastity should entertain a thought, which even
   Jewish chastity entertained not! Love your wives then, but love them
   chastely. In your intercourse with them keep yourselves within the
   bounds necessary for the procreation of children. And inasmuch as you
   cannot otherwise have them, descend to it with regret. For this
   necessity is the punishment of that Adam from whom we are sprung. Let
   us not make a pride of our punishment. It is his punishment who because
   he was made mortal by sin, was condemned [1772] to bring forth only a
   mortal posterity. This punishment God has not withdrawn, that man might
   remember from what state he is called away, and to what state he is
   called, and might seek for that union, in which there can be no
   corruption.

   26. Among that people then, because it was necessary that there should
   be an abundant increase until Christ came, by the multiplication of
   that people in whom were to be prefigured all that was to be prefigured
   as instruction for the Church, it was a duty to marry wives, by means
   of whom that people in whom the Church should be foreshown might
   increase. But when the King of all nations Himself was born, then began
   the honour of virginity with the mother of the Lord, who had the
   privilege [1773] of bearing a Son without any loss of her virgin
   purity. As that then was a true marriage, and a marriage free from all
   corruption, so why should not the husband chastely receive what his
   wife had chastely brought forth? For as she was a wife in chastity, so
   was he in chastity a husband; and as she was in chastity a mother, so
   was he in chastity a father. Whoso then says that he ought not to be
   called father, because he did not beget his Son in the usual [1774]
   way, looks rather to the satisfaction of passion in the procreation of
   children, and not the natural feeling of affection. What others desire
   to fulfil in the flesh, he in a more excellent way fulfilled in the
   spirit. For thus they who adopt children, beget them by the heart in
   greater chastity, whom they cannot by the flesh beget. Consider,
   brethren, the laws of adoption; how a man comes to be the son of
   another, of whom he was not born, so that the choice of the person who
   adopts has more right in him than the nature of him who begets him has.
   Not only then must Joseph be a father, but in a most excellent manner a
   father. For men beget children of women also who are not their wives,
   and they are called natural children, and the children of the lawful
   marriage are placed above them. Now as to the manner of their birth,
   they are born alike; why then are the latter set above the other, but
   because the love of a wife, of whom children are born, is the more
   pure. The union of the sexes is not regarded in this case, for this is
   the same in both women. Where has the wife the pre-eminence but in her
   fidelity, her wedded love, her more true and pure affection? If then a
   man could have children by his wife without this intercourse, should he
   not have so much the more joy thereby, in proportion to the greater
   chastity of her whom he loves the most?

   27. See too by this how it may happen, that one man may have not two
   sons only, but two fathers also. For by the mention of adoption, it may
   occur to your thoughts that so it may be. For it is said; A man can
   have two sons, but two fathers he cannot have. But the truth is, it is
   found that he can have two fathers also, if one have begotten him of
   his body, and another adopted him in love. If one man then can have two
   fathers, Joseph could have two fathers also; might be begotten by one,
   and adopted by another. And if this be so, what do their cavillings
   mean, who insist that Matthew has followed one set of generations, and
   Luke another? And in fact we find that so it is, for Matthew has given
   Jacob as the father of Joseph, and Luke Heli. Now it is true it might
   seem, as if one and the same man, whose son Joseph was, had two names.
   But inasmuch as the grandfathers, and all the other progenitors which
   they enumerate, are different, and in the very number of the
   generations, the one has more, and the other fewer, Joseph is plainly
   shown hereby to have had two fathers. Now having disposed of the cavil
   of this question, forasmuch as clear reason has shown that it may
   happen that he who has begotten a child may be one father, and he who
   has adopted him another: supposing two fathers, it is nothing strange
   if the grandfathers and the great grandfathers, and the rest in the
   line upwards which are enumerated, should be different as coming from
   different fathers.

   28. And let not the law of adoption seem to you to be foreign to our
   Scriptures, and that, as if it were recognised [1775] only in the
   practice of human laws, it cannot fall in with the authority of the
   divine books. For it is a thing established of old time, and frequently
   heard of in the Ecclesiastical books [1776] --that not only the natural
   way of birth, but the free choice [1777] of the will also, should give
   birth to a child. For women, if they had no children of their own, used
   to adopt children born of their husbands by their hand-maids, and even
   oblige their husbands to give them children in this way; as Sarah,
   Rachel, and Leah. [1778] And in doing this the husbands did not commit
   adultery, in that they obeyed their wives in that matter which had
   regard to conjugal duty, according to what the Apostle saith: "The wife
   hath not power of her own body, but the husband; and likewise also the
   husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife." [1779] Moses
   too, who was born of a Hebrew mother and was exposed, was adopted by
   Pharaoh's daughter. [1780] There were not then indeed the same forms of
   law as now, but the choice of the will was taken for the rule of law,
   as the Apostle saith also in another place, "The Gentiles which have
   not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law." [1781] But
   if it is permitted to women to make those their children to whom they
   have not given birth, why should it not be allowed men to do so too
   with those whom they have not begotten of their body, but of the love
   of adoption. For we read that the patriarch Jacob even, the father of
   so many children, made his grandchildren, the sons of Joseph, his own
   children, in these words: "These too shall be mine, and they shall
   receive the land with their brethren, and those which thou begettest
   after them shall be thine." [1782] But it will be said, perhaps, that
   this word "adoption" is not found in the Holy Scriptures. As though it
   were of any importance by what name it is called, when the thing itself
   is there--for a woman to have a child to whom she has not given birth,
   or a man a child whom he has not begotten. And he may, without any
   opposition from me, refuse to call Joseph adopted, provided he grant
   that he may have been the son of a man of whose body he was not born.
   Yet the Apostle Paul does continually use this very word "adoption,"
   and [1783] that to express a great mystery. For though Scripture
   testifies that our Lord Jesus Christ is the only Son of God, it says,
   that the brethren and coheirs whom He hath vouchsafed to have, are made
   so by a kind of adoption through Divine grace. "When," saith he, "the
   fulness of time was come, God sent forth His Son, made of a woman, made
   under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might
   receive the adoption of sons." [1784] And in another place: "We groan
   within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of
   our body." [1785] And again, when he was speaking of the Jews, "I could
   wish that myself were accursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen
   according to the flesh; who are Israelites, to whom pertaineth the
   adoption, and the glory, and the testaments, and the giving of the law;
   whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came,
   Who is over all, God blessed for ever." [1786] Where he shows, that the
   word "adoption," or at least the thing which it signifies, was of
   ancient use among the Jews, just as was the Testament and the giving of
   the Law, which he mentions together with it.

   29. Added to this; there is another way peculiar to the Jews, in which
   a man might be the son of another of whom he was not born according to
   the flesh. For kinsmen used to marry the wives of their next of kin,
   who died without children, to raise up seed to him that was deceased.
   [1787] So then he who was thus born was both his son of whom he was
   born, and his in whose line of succession he was born. All this has
   been said, lest any one, thinking it impossible for two fathers to be
   mentioned properly for one man, should imagine that either of the
   Evangelists who have narrated the generations of the Lord are to be, by
   an impious calumny, charged so to say with a lie; especially when we
   may see that we are warned against this by their very words. For
   Matthew, who is understood to make mention of that father of whom
   Joseph was born, enumerates the generations thus: "This one begat the
   other," so as to come to what he says at the end, "Jacob begat Joseph."
   But Luke--because he cannot properly be said to be begotten who is made
   a child either by adoption, or who is born in the succession of the
   deceased, of her who was his wife--did not say, "Heli begat Joseph," or
   "Joseph whom Heli begat," but "Who was the son of Heli," whether by
   adoption, or as being born of the next of kin in the succession of one
   deceased. [1788]

   30. Enough has now been said to show that the question, why the
   generations are reckoned through Joseph and not through Mary, ought not
   to perplex us; for as she was a mother without carnal desire, so was he
   a father without any carnal intercourse. Let then the generations
   ascend and descend through him. And let us not exclude him from being a
   father, because he had none of this carnal desire. Let his greater
   purity only confirm rather his relationship of father, lest the holy
   Mary herself reproach us. For she would not put her own name before her
   husband; but said, "Thy father and I have sought Thee sorrowing."
   [1789] Let not then these perverse murmurers do that which the chaste
   spouse of Joseph did not. Let us reckon then through Joseph, because as
   he is in chastity a husband, so is he in chastity a father. And let us
   put the man before the woman, according to the order of nature and the
   law of God. For if we should cast him aside and leave her, he would
   say, and say with reason, "Why have you excluded me? Why do not the
   generations ascend and descend through me?" Shall we say to him,
   "Because thou didst not beget Him by the operation of thy flesh?"
   Surely he will answer, "And is it by the operation of the flesh that
   the Virgin bare Him? What the Holy Spirit wrought, He wrought for
   both." "Being a just man," [1790] saith the Gospel. The husband then
   was just and the woman just. The Holy Spirit reposing in the justice of
   them both, gave to both a Son. In that sex which is by nature fitted to
   give birth, He wrought that birth which was for the husband also. And
   therefore doth the Angel bid them both give the Child a name, and
   hereby is the authority of both parents established. For when Zacharias
   was yet dumb, the mother gave a name to her newborn son. And when they
   who were present "made signs to his father what he would have him
   called, he took a writing-table and wrote" [1791] the name which she
   had already pronounced. So to Mary too the Angel saith, "Behold, thou
   shalt conceive a Son, and shalt call His name Jesus." [1792] And to
   Joseph also he saith, "Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto
   thee Mary thy wife; for That which is conceived in her is of the Holy
   Ghost. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shalt call His name
   Jesus, for He shall save His people from their sins." [1793] Again it
   is said, "And she brought forth a Son to him," [1794] by which he is
   established to be a father, not in the flesh indeed, but in love. Let
   us then acknowledge him to be a father, as in truth he is. For most
   advisedly and most wisely do the Evangelists reckon through him,
   whether Matthew in descending from Abraham down to Christ, or Luke in
   ascending from Christ through Abraham up to God. The one reckons in a
   descending, the other in an ascending order; but both through Joseph.
   And why? Because he is the father. How the father? Because he is the
   more undeniably [1795] a father in proportion as he is more chastely
   so. He was thought, it is true, to be the father of our Lord Jesus
   Christ in another way: that is, as other parents are according to a
   fleshly birth, and not through the fruitfulness of a wholly spiritual
   love. For Luke said, "Who was supposed to be the father of Jesus."
   [1796] Why supposed? Because men's thoughts and suppositions were
   directed to what is usually the case with men. The Lord then was not of
   the seed of Joseph, though He was supposed to be; yet nevertheless the
   Son of the Virgin Mary, who is also the Son of God, was born to Joseph,
   the fruit of his piety and love.

   31. But why does St Matthew reckon in a descending, and Luke in an
   ascending order? I pray you give attentive ear to what the Lord may
   help me to say on this matter; with your minds now at ease, and
   disembarrassed from all the perplexity of these cavillings. Matthew
   descends through his generations, to signify our Lord Jesus Christ
   descending to bear our sins, that in the seed of Abraham all nations
   might be blessed. Wherefore, he does not begin with Adam, for from him
   is the whole race of mankind. Nor with Noe, because from his family
   again, after the flood, descended the whole human race. Nor could the
   man Christ Jesus, as descended from Adam, from whom all men are
   descended, bear [1797] upon the fulfilment of prophecy; nor, again, as
   descended from Noe, from whom also all men are descended; but only as
   descended from Abraham, who at that time was chosen, that all nations
   should be blessed in his seed, when the earth was now full of nations.
   But Luke reckons in an ascending order, and does not begin to enumerate
   the generations from the beginning of the account of our Lord's birth,
   but from that place, where he relates His Baptism by John. Now, as in
   the incarnation of the Lord, the sins of the human race are taken upon
   Him to be borne, so in the consecration of His Baptism are they taken
   on Him to be expiated. Accordingly, St. Matthew, as representing His
   descent to bear our sins, enumerates the generations in a descending
   order; but the other, as representing the expiation of sins, not His
   own, of course, but our sins, enumerates them in an ascending order.
   Again, St. Matthew descends through Solomon, by whose mother David
   sinned; St. Luke ascends through Nathan [1798] another son of the same
   David, through whom he was purged from his sin. [1799] For we read,
   that Nathan was sent to him to reprove him, and that he might through
   repentance be healed. Both Evangelists meet together in David; the one
   in descending, the other in ascending; and from David to Abraham, or
   from Abraham to David, there is no difference in any one generation.
   And so Christ, both the Son of David and the Son of Abraham, comes up
   to God. For to God must we be brought back, when renewed in Baptism,
   from the abolition of sins.

   32. Now, in the generations which Matthew enumerates, the predominant
   [1800] number is forty. For it is a custom of the Holy Scriptures, not
   to reckon what is over and above certain round numbers. [1801] For thus
   it is said to be four hundred years, after which the people of Israel
   went out of Egypt, whereas it is four hundred and thirty. [1802] And so
   here the one generation, which exceeds the fortieth, does not take away
   the predominance of that number. Now this number signifies the life
   wherein we labour in this world, as long as we are absent from the
   Lord, during which the temporal dispensation of the preaching of the
   truth is necessary. For the number ten, by which the perfection of
   blessedness is signified, multiplied four times, because of the
   fourfold divisions of the seasons, and the fourfold divisions of the
   world, will make the number forty. [1803] Wherefore Moses and Elias,
   and the Mediator Himself, our Lord Jesus Christ, fasted forty days,
   because in the time of this life, continence from the enticements of
   the body is necessary. Forty years also did the people wander in the
   wilderness. [1804] Forty days the waters of the flood lasted. [1805]
   Forty days after His resurrection did the Lord converse with the
   disciples, persuading them of the reality [1806] of His risen body,
   [1807] whereby He showed that in this life, "wherein we are absent from
   the Lord" [1808] (which the number forty, as has been already said,
   mystically figures), we have need to celebrate the memory of the Lord's
   Body, which we do in the Church, till He come. [1809] Forasmuch, then
   as our Lord descended to this life, and "the Word was made flesh, that
   He might be delivered for our sins, and rise again for our
   justification," [1810] Matthew followed the number forty; so that the
   one generation which there exceeds that number, either does not hinder
   its predominance--just as those thirty years do not hinder the perfect
   number of four hundred--or that it even has this further meaning, that
   the Lord Himself, by the addition of whom the forty-one is made up, so
   descended to this life to bear our sins, as yet, by a peculiar and
   especial excellency, whereby He is in such sense man, as to be also
   God, to be found to be excepted from this life. For of Him only is that
   said, which never has been or shall be able to be said of any holy man,
   however perfected in wisdom and righteousness, "The Word was made
   Flesh." [1811]

   33. But Luke, who ascends up through the generations from the baptism
   of the Lord, makes up the number seventy-seven, beginning to ascend
   from our Lord Jesus Christ Himself through Joseph, and coming through
   Adam up to God. And that is, because by this number is signified the
   abolition of all sins, which takes place in Baptism. Not that the Lord
   Himself had any thing to be forgiven Him in baptism, but that by His
   humility He set forth its usefulness to us. And though that was only
   the baptism of John, yet there appeared in it to outward sense the
   Trinity of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and hereby was
   consecrated the Baptism of Christ Himself, whereby Christians were to
   be baptized. The Father in the voice which came from heaven, the Son in
   the person of the Mediator Himself, the Holy Ghost in the dove. [1812]

   34. Now, why the number seventy-seven should contain all sins which are
   remitted in Baptism, there occurs this probable reason, for that the
   number ten implies the perfection of all righteousness, and
   blessedness, when the creature denoted by seven [1813] cleaves to the
   Trinity of the Creator; whence also the Decalogue of the Law was
   consecrated in ten precepts. Now the "transgression" of the number ten
   is signified by the number eleven; and sin is known to be
   transgression, when a man, in seeking something "more," exceeds the
   rule of justice. And hence the Apostle calls avarice "the root of all
   evils." [1814] And to the soul which goes a-whoring from God, it is
   said, in the Person of the same Lord, "Thou wast in hope, if thou didst
   depart from Me, that thou wouldest have something more." Because the
   sinner then has in his transgression, that is, in his sin, regard to
   himself alone--in that he wishes to gratify himself by some private
   good of his own (whence they are blamed "who seek their own, not the
   things which are Jesus Christ's;" [1815] and charity is commended,
   "which seeketh not her own" [1816] ); therefore, this number eleven, by
   which transgression is signified, is multiplied, not ten times, but
   seven, and so makes up seventy-seven. For transgression looks [1817]
   not to the Trinity of the Creator, but to the creature, that is, to the
   man himself, which creature the number seven denotes. Three, because of
   the soul, in which there [1818] is a kind of image of the Trinity of
   the Creator (for it is in the soul that man has been made after the
   image of God); and four, because of the body. For the four elements
   [1819] of which the body is made up are known by all. And if any one
   know them not, he may easily remember, that this body of the world, in
   which our bodies move along, has, so to say, four principal parts,
   which even Holy Scripture is constantly making mention of, East, and
   West, and North, and South. And forasmuch as sins are committed either
   by the mind, as in the will only, or by the works of the body also, and
   so visibly; therefore the Prophet Amos continually introduces [1820]
   God as threatening, and saying, "For three and four iniquities I will
   not turn away," that is," I will not dissemble My wrath." [1821] Three,
   because of the nature of the soul; four, because of that of the body;
   of which two, man consists.

   35. So, then, seven times eleven, that is, as has been explained, the
   transgression of righteousness, which has regard only to the sinner
   himself, make up the number seventy-seven, in which it is signified,
   that all sins which are remitted in Baptism are contained. And hence it
   is that Luke ascends up through seventy-seven generations unto God, as
   showing that man is reconciled unto God by the abolition of all sin.
   Hence the Lord Himself saith to Peter, who asked Him how oft he ought
   to forgive a brother, "I say not unto thee [1822] seven times, but
   until seventy times and seven." [1823] Now, whatever else can be drawn
   out of these recesses and treasures of God's mysteries by those who are
   more diligent and more worthy than I, receive. Yet have I spoken
   according to my poor ability, as the Lord hath aided and given me
   power, and as I best could, considering also the little time I had. If
   any one of you be capable of anything further, let him knock at Him
   from whom I too receive what I am able to receive and speak. But, above
   all things, remember this; not to be disturbed by the Scriptures, which
   you do not yet understand, nor be puffed up by what you do understand;
   but what you do not understand, with submission [1824] wait for, and
   what you do understand, hold fast with charity.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1685] 2 Cor. iv. 7.

   [1686] Muneris.

   [1687] Matt. x. 22.

   [1688] Ipsos venatores venatus est ad salutem.

   [1689] Ps. xxii. 16, 17.

   [1690] 1 Cor. iv. 9.

   [1691] Spiritaliter.

   [1692] Venatorem.

   [1693] John xvi. 33.

   [1694] Sacramenti.

   [1695] Prava.

   [1696] Deberet.

   [1697] Commendare.

   [1698] Populariter agere.

   [1699] Gen. xxii. 18.

   [1700] Singularitate.

   [1701] Periti.

   [1702] 1 Cor. i. 27, 28.

   [1703] Col. ii. 6, 7.

   [1704] Col. ii. 3.

   [1705] 2 Cor. iii. 16.

   [1706] Calumnias.

   [1707] Perversis moribus.

   [1708] Matt. i. 1.

   [1709] Matt. i. 2-6.

   [1710] Matt. i. 7-18.

   [1711] Matt. i. 19.

   [1712] Velut.

   [1713] Auderet.

   [1714] Matt. i. 20.

   [1715] Matt. i. 21.

   [1716] Sanctitas vestra.

   [1717] 1 Cor. xi. 19.

   [1718] Sacramentum.

   [1719] Gustatum.

   [1720] Sacramentum.

   [1721] Jer. xxvii.

   [1722] Rom. xi. 1.

   [1723] Meruerunt.

   [1724] 1 Cor. xv. 6.

   [1725] Acts i. 15.

   [1726] Acts xiii. 46.

   [1727] Jer. xxix. 7.

   [1728] 1 Tim. ii. 1, 2.

   [1729] Agricultura.

   [1730] Ps. cxviii. 22.

   [1731] Matt. i. 20.

   [1732] Matt. i. 21.

   [1733] Luke ii. 42.

   [1734] Luke ii. 48, 49.

   [1735] Luke i. 31.

   [1736] Luke i. 32.

   [1737] Meruerat.

   [1738] Dignitatem.

   [1739] Ephes. v. 23.

   [1740] Gal. iv. 4.

   [1741] Fidei.

   [1742] 'sh femina mulier omnis ætatis et conditionis, sive nupta est,
   sive non est. Gesenius, Lex. Heb., vide exempla, especially Gen. xxiv.
   5 and Isa. iv. 1. Vid. Serm. lii. 10.

   [1743] Gen. ii. 22.

   [1744] Luke ii. 49, 50, 51.

   [1745] Wisd. viii. 1.

   [1746] Rom. i. 3.

   [1747] Commendaret.

   [1748] Rom. ix. 5.

   [1749] Matt. xxii. 42.

   [1750] Ps. cx. 1.

   [1751] Matt. xxii. 43, 44, 45.

   [1752] Ps. cxxxii. 11.

   [1753] Ps. cx. 1.

   [1754] Phil. ii. 6.

   [1755] Phil. ii. 7.

   [1756] Uxorem.

   [1757] 1 Cor. vii. 29.

   [1758] Debitum.

   [1759] 1 Thess. iv. 4.

   [1760] Ephes. v. 25.

   [1761] Tabulas.

   [1762] Tabulæ matrimoniales.

   [1763] Ut sint soceri non lenones.

   [1764] Frontem.

   [1765] Adulterium quasi ad alterum.

   [1766] 1 Cor vii. 6.

   [1767] 1 Cor. vii. 5.

   [1768] Modo.

   [1769] Ecclus. xiv. 18.

   [1770] Phil. iii. 19.

   [1771] 1 Kings xix. 6.

   [1772] Meruit.

   [1773] Meruit.

   [1774] Sic.

   [1775] Animadversum.

   [1776] The Scriptures.

   [1777] Gratia.

   [1778] Gen. xvi. 2 and xxx.

   [1779] 1 Cor. vii. 4.

   [1780] Exod. ii. 10.

   [1781] Rom. ii. 14.

   [1782] Gen. xlviii. 5, 6.

   [1783] In magno sacramento.

   [1784] Gal. iv. 4, 5.

   [1785] Rom. viii. 23.

   [1786] Rom. ix. 3, etc.

   [1787] Deut. xxv. 5; Matt. xxii. 24.

   [1788] Of these two solutions, (1) that Joseph may have been the
   adopted son of Eli, or (2) the son of his wife who, as the next of kin,
   married Jacob after his decease, the latter is stated by Africanus
   (Eus. H. E. i. 7) to be traditional and derived from kinsmen of the
   Lord's. It may be the more likely, in that the name of the wife of
   Matthan and Malchi (Estha) is also handed down, through whom, though
   half-blood, Heli and Jacob became, at all events, near kinsmen. Else in
   the Jerus. Talm. (ap. Lightfoot ad loc.) St. Mary is called the
   daughter of Heli, and her genealogy might be counted as his, to whom,
   according to the above statement, she was nearly related. The name
   Heli, indeed, is no way connected (as some have thought) with Eliachim,
   i.q. Joachim; but this name of the father of the Blessed Virgin is said
   by St. Augustin to have been taken by the Manichees from apocryphal
   books (comp. Faust. xxiii. 9), so neither is it any hindrance. St.
   Augustin remarks (Quæst. Ev. ii. 5) that any one possible explanation
   is sufficient, and yet that it would be rash to say that there were
   only the two that he had named. He treats it then as "madness" to
   ground any charge against the evangelists thereon; inasmuch as it can
   be solved, faith is indifferent to the "how," since God has not
   explained it.

   [1789] Luke ii. 48.

   [1790] Matt. i. 19.

   [1791] Luke i. 63.

   [1792] Luke i. 31.

   [1793] Matt. i. 20, 21.

   [1794] Luke ii. 7. There seems to be no trace of any such reading
   anywhere else.

   [1795] Firmius.

   [1796] Luke iii. 23.

   [1797] Pertinere.

   [1798] St. Augustin corrects this confusion of Nathan, the son of
   David, with the prophet Nathan, in his Retract. B. ii. c. 16.

   [1799] 2 Sam. xii. 1.

   [1800] Eminet.

   [1801] Certos articulos numerorum.

   [1802] Gen. xv. 13; Acts vii. 6.

   [1803] Deut. ix. 9; 1 Kings xix. 8; Matt. iv. 2.

   [1804] Num. xxxii. 13.

   [1805] Gen. vii. 4.

   [1806] Veritatem.

   [1807] Acts i. 3.

   [1808] 2 Cor. v. 6.

   [1809] 1 Cor. xi. 26.

   [1810] Rom. iv. 25.

   [1811] John i. 14.

   [1812] Matt. iii. 16.

   [1813] Septenaria.

   [1814] 1 Tim. vi. 10.

   [1815] Phil. ii. 21.

   [1816] 1 Cor. xiii. 5.

   [1817] Pertinet.

   [1818] Vid. Aug. De Trin. ix. 4, 5; xiv. c. 6-16, etc.; lib. xv. 40-43.
   Ep. 169 (Ben.). 6. De Civ. Dei, xi. 26 and 28. Conf. xiii. 12 (11) and
   note in Oxf. ed.

   [1819] Primordia.

   [1820] Commemorat.

   [1821] Amos i. 2, Sept.

   [1822] Vide Sermon xxxiii. (Bened. lxxxiii.).

   [1823] Matt. xviii. 22.

   [1824] Honore.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon II.

   [LII. Ben.]

   Of the words of St. Matthew's Gospel, Chap. iii. 13, "Then Jesus cometh
   from Galilee to the Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him."
   Concerning the Trinity.

   1. The lesson of the Gospel hath set before me a subject whereof to
   speak to you, beloved, as though by the Lord's command, and by His
   command in very deed. For my heart hath waited for an order as it were
   from Him to speak, that I might understand thereby that it is His wish
   that I should speak on that which He hath also willed should be read to
   you. Let your zeal and devotion then give ear, and before the Lord our
   God Himself aid ye my labour. For we behold and see as it were in a
   divine spectacle exhibited to us, the notice of our God in Trinity,
   conveyed [1825] to us at the river Jordan. For when Jesus came and was
   baptized by John, the Lord by His servant (and this He did for an
   example of humility; for He showeth that in this same humility is
   righteousness fulfilled, when as John said to Him, "I have need to be
   baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?" [1826] He answered, "Suffer
   it to be so now, that all righteousness may be fulfilled" [1827] ),
   when He was baptized then, the heavens were opened, and the Holy Spirit
   came down upon Him in the form of a Dove: and then a Voice from on high
   followed, "This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." [1828]
   Here then we have the Trinity in a certain sort distinguished. The
   Father in the Voice,--the Son in the Man,--the Holy Spirit in the Dove.
   It was only needful just to mention this, for most obvious is it to
   see. For the notice of the Trinity is here conveyed to us plainly and
   without leaving room for doubt or hesitation. For the Lord Christ
   Himself coming in the form of a servant to John, is doubtlessly the
   Son: for it cannot be said that it was the Father, or the Holy Spirit.
   "Jesus," it is said, "cometh;" [1829] that is, the Son of God. And who
   hath any doubt about the Dove? or who saith, "What is the Dove?" when
   the Gospel itself most plainly testifieth, "The Holy Spirit descended
   upon Him in the form of a dove." [1830] And in like manner as to that
   voice there can be no doubt that it is the Father's, when He saith,
   "Thou art My Son." [1831] Thus then we have the Trinity distinguished.

   2. And if we consider the places, I say with confidence (though in fear
   I say it), that the Trinity is in a manner separable. When Jesus came
   to the river, He came from one place to another; and the Dove descended
   from heaven to earth, from one place to another; and the very Voice of
   the Father sounded neither from the earth, nor from the water, but from
   heaven; these three are as it were separated in places, in offices, and
   in works. But one may say to me, "Show the Trinity to be inseparable
   rather. Remember that thou who art speaking art a Catholic, and to
   Catholics art thou speaking." For thus doth our faith teach, that is,
   the true, the right Catholic faith, gathered not by the opinion of
   private [1832] judgment, but by the witness of the Scriptures, [1833]
   not subject to the fluctuations of heretical rashness, but grounded on
   Apostolic truth: this we know, this we believe. This though we see it
   not with our eyes, nor as yet with the heart, so long as we are being
   purified by faith, yet by this faith we most lightly and most
   strenuously maintain--That the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are a
   Trinity inseparable; One God, not three Gods. But yet so One God, as
   that the Son is not the Father, and the Father is not the Son, and the
   Holy Spirit is neither the Father nor the Son, but the Spirit of the
   Father and of the Son. This ineffable Divinity, abiding ever in itself,
   making all things new, creating, creating anew, sending, recalling,
   judging, delivering, this Trinity, I say, we know to be at once
   ineffable and inseparable.

   3. What am I then about? See: The Son came separately in the Man; The
   Holy Spirit descended separately from heaven in the form of a Dove; The
   Voice of the Father sounded separately out of heaven, "This is My Son."
   Where then is this inseparable Trinity? God hath made you attentive by
   my words. Pray for me, and open, as it were, the folds [1834] of your
   hearts, and may He grant you wherewith your hearts so opened may be
   filled. Share my travail with me. For you see what I have undertaken;
   and not only what, but who I am that have undertaken it, and of what I
   wish to speak, and where and what my position is, even in that "body
   which is corruptible, and presseth down the soul, and the earthly
   habitation weigheth down the mind that museth upon many things." [1835]
   When therefore I abstract my mind from the multiplicity of things, and
   gather it up into the One God, the inseparable Trinity, that so I may
   see something which I may say of it, think ye that in this "body which
   presseth down the soul," I shall be able to say (in order that I may
   speak to you something worthy of the subject), "O Lord, I have lifted
   up my soul unto Thee." [1836] May He assist me, may He lift it up with
   me. For I am too infirm in respect of Him, and He in respect of me is
   too mighty.

   4. Now this is a question which is often proposed by the most earnest
   brethren, and often has place in the conversation of the lovers of
   God's word; for this much knocking is wont to be made unto God, while
   men say, "Doeth the Father anything which the Son doeth not? or doeth
   the Son anything which the Father doeth not?" Let us first speak of the
   Father and the Son. And when He to Whom we say, "Be Thou my helper,
   leave me not," [1837] shall have given good success to this essay of
   ours, then shall we understand how that the Holy Spirit also is in no
   way separated from the operation of the Father and the Son. As
   concerning the Father and the Son, then, brethren, give ear. Doeth the
   Father anything without the Son? We answer, No. Do you doubt it? For
   what doeth He without Him "by Whom all things were made? All things,"
   saith the Scripture, "were made by Him." [1838] And to inculcate it
   fully [1839] upon the slow, and hard, and disputatious it added, And
   without Him was not anything made."

   5. What then, brethren? "All things were made by Him." We understand
   then by this that the whole creation which was made by the Son, the
   Father made by His Word--God, by His Power and Wisdom. Shall we then
   say, "All things" indeed when they were created, "were made by Him,"
   but now the Father doeth not all things by Him? God forbid! Be such a
   thought as this far from the hearts of believers; be it driven away
   from the mind of the devout; from the understanding of the godly! It
   cannot be that He created by Him, and doth not govern by Him. God
   forbid that what existeth should be governed without Him, when by Him
   it was made, that it might have existence! But let us show by the
   testimony of the same Scripture that not only were all things created
   and made by Him as we have quoted from the Gospel, "All things were
   made by Him, and without Him was nothing made," but that the things
   which were made are also governed and ordered by Him. You acknowledge
   Christ then to be the Power and Wisdom of God; acknowledge too what is
   said of Wisdom, "She reacheth from one end to another mightily, and
   sweetly doth she order all things." [1840] Let us not then doubt that
   by Him are all things ruled, by whom all things were made. So then the
   Father doeth nothing without the Son, nor the Son without the Father.

   6. But so a difficulty meets us, which we have undertaken to solve in
   the Name of the Lord, and by His will. If the Father doeth nothing
   without the Son, nor the Son without the Father, will it not follow,
   that we must say that the Father also was born of the Virgin Mary, the
   Father suffered under Pontius Pilate, the Father rose again and
   ascended into heaven? God forbid! We do not say this, because we do not
   believe it. "For I believed, therefore have I spoken: we also believe,
   and therefore speak." [1841] What [1842] is in the Creed? That the Son
   was born of a Virgin, not the Father. What is in the Creed? That the
   Son suffered under Pontius Pilate and was dead, not the Father. Have we
   forgotten, that some, misunderstanding this, are called
   "Patripassians," who say that the Father Himself was born of a woman,
   that the Father Himself suffered, that the Father is the same as the
   Son, that they are two names, not two things? And these hath the Church
   Catholic separated from the communion of saints, that they might not
   deceive any, but dispute in separation from her.

   7. Let us then recall the difficulty of the question to your minds. One
   may say to me, "You have said that the Father doeth nothing without the
   Son, nor the Son without the Father, and testimonies you have adduced
   out of the Scriptures, that the Father doeth nothing without the Son,
   for that all things were made by Him;' and again, that that which was
   made is not governed without the Son, for that He is the Wisdom of the
   Father, reaching from one end to another mightily, and sweetly ordering
   all things.' And now you tell me, as if contradicting yourself, that
   the Son was born of a Virgin, and not the Father; the Son suffered, not
   the Father; the Son rose again, not the Father. See then, here I see
   the Son doing something which the Father doeth not. Do you therefore
   either confess that the Son doeth something without the Father, or else
   that the Father also was born and suffered, and died and rose again.
   Say one or the other of these, choose one of the two." No: I will
   choose neither, I will say neither the one nor the other. I will
   neither say the Son doeth anything without the Father, for I should lie
   were I to say so; nor that the Father was born, suffered, and died, and
   rose again, for I should equally lie were I to say this. "How then,
   saith he, will you disentangle yourself from these straits?"

   8. The proposing of the question pleases you. May God grant His aid,
   that its solution may please you too. See, what I am asking Him, that
   He would free both me and you. For in one faith do we stand in the Name
   of Christ; and in one house do we live under one Lord, and in one body
   are we members under One Head, and by One Spirit are we quickened.
   [1843] That the Lord then may set both me who speak, and you who hear,
   free from the straits of this most perplexing question, I say as
   follows: The Son indeed and not the Father was born of the Virgin Mary;
   but this very birth of the Son, not of the Father, was the work both of
   the Father and the Son. The Father indeed suffered not, but the Son,
   yet the suffering of the Son was the work of the Father and the Son.
   The Father did not rise again, but the Son, yet the resurrection of the
   Son was the work of the Father and the Son. We seem then to be already
   quit of this question, but peradventure it is only by words of my own;
   let us see whether it is not as well by words divine. It is my place
   then to prove by testimonies of the sacred books, that the birth, and
   passion, and resurrection of the Son were in such sort the works of the
   Father and the Son, that whereas it is the birth, and passion, and
   resurrection of the Son only, yet these three things which belong to
   the Son only, were wrought neither by the Father alone, nor by the Son
   alone, but by the Father and the Son. Let us prove each several point,
   you hear as judges; the case has been already laid open; now let the
   witnesses come forth. Let your judgment say to me, as is wont to be
   said to pleaders in a cause, "Establish what you promise." I will do so
   assuredly, with the Lord's assistance, and will cite the books of
   heavenly law. Ye have listened to me attentively while proposing the
   question, listen now with still more attention while I prove my point.

   9. I must first teach you concerning the birth of Christ, how it is the
   work of the Father and the Son, though what the Father and the Son did
   work pertains only to the Son. I will quote Paul; one competently
   versed in the divine law. That Paul, I say, will I quote, who
   prescribes the laws of peace, not of litigation, for lawyers at this
   day also have a Paul who prescribes the laws of the courts, [1844] not
   the Christian's laws. Let the holy Apostle show us then how the birth
   of the Son was the work of the Father. "But," saith he, "when the
   fulness of time was come, God sent forth His Son, made of a woman, made
   under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law." [1845] Thus
   have ye heard him, and because it is plain and express, have
   understood. See, the Father made the Son to be born of a Virgin. For
   "when the fulness of time was come, God sent His Son;" the Father sent
   His Christ. How sent He Him? "made of a woman, made under the Law." The
   Father then made Him of a woman under the Law.

   10. Doth this peradventure perplex you, that I said of a virgin, and
   Paul saith of a woman? Let not this perplex you; let us not stop here,
   for I am not speaking to persons without instruction. The Scripture
   saith both, both "of a virgin," and "of a woman." Where saith it, "of a
   virgin? Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son." [1846] And
   "of a woman," as you have just heard; here there is no contradiction.
   For the peculiarity of the Hebrew tongue gives [1847] the name of
   "women" not to such as have lost their virgin estate, but to females
   generally. You have a plain passage in Genesis, when Eve herself was
   first made, "He made her a woman." [1848] Scripture also in another
   place saith, that God ordered "the women" to be separated "which had
   not known man by lying with him." [1849] This then ought now to be well
   established, and should not detain us, that so we may be able to
   explain, by the Lord's assistance, what will deservedly detain us.

   11. We have then proved that the birth of the Son was the work of the
   Father; now let us prove that it was the work of the Son also. Now what
   is the birth of the Son of the Virgin Mary? Surely it is His assumption
   of the form of a servant in the Virgin's womb. Is the birth of the Son
   ought else, but the taking of the form of a servant in the womb of the
   Virgin? Now hear how that this was the work of the Son also. "Who when
   He was in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God,
   but emptied Himself, taking upon Him the form of a servant." [1850]
   "When the fulness of time was come, God sent forth His Son, made of a
   woman," [1851] who was "made [1852] His Son of the seed of David
   according to the flesh." [1853] In this then we see that the birth of
   the Son was the work of the Father; but in that the Son Himself
   "emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant," we see that the birth
   of the Son was the work also of the Son Himself. This then has been
   proved; so let us pass on from this point, and receive ye with
   attention that which comes next in order.

   12. Let us prove that the Passion also of the Son was the work of the
   Father and the Son. We may see [1854] that the Passion of the Son is
   the work of the Father, since it is written, "Who spared not His own
   Son, but delivered Him up for us all;" [1855] and that the Passion of
   the Son was His own work also, "Who loved me, and gave Himself for me."
   [1856] The Father delivered up the Son, and the Son delivered up
   Himself. This Passion was wrought out for one, but by both. As
   therefore the birth, so the Passion, of Christ, was not the work of the
   Son without the Father, nor of the Father without the Son. The Father
   delivered up the Son, and the Son delivered up Himself. What did Judas
   in it, but his own sin? Let us then pass on from this point also, and
   come we to the resurrection.

   13. Let us see the Son indeed, and not the Father, rising again, but
   both the Father and the Son working the resurrection of the Son. The
   resurrection of the Son is the work of the Father; for it is written,
   "Wherefore He exalted Him, and gave Him a name which is above every
   name." [1857] The Father therefore raised the Son to life again, in
   exalting, and awakening Him from the dead. And did the Son also raise
   Himself? Assuredly He did. For He said of the temple, as the figure of
   His own body, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it
   again." [1858] Lastly, as the laying down of life has reference to the
   Passion, so the taking it again has reference to the resurrection. Let
   us see then if the Son laid down His life indeed, and the Father
   restored His life to Him, and not He to Himself. For that the Father
   restored it is plain. For so saith the Psalm, "Raise Thou Me up, and I
   will requite them." [1859] But why do ye wait for a proof from me that
   the Son also restored life to Himself? Let Him speak Himself; "I have
   power to lay down My life." I have not yet said what I promised. I have
   said, "to lay it down;" and you are crying out already, for you are
   flying past me. For well-instructed as ye are in the school of your
   heavenly teacher, as attentively listening to, and in pious affection
   rehearsing, [1860] what is read, ye are not ignorant of what comes
   next. "I have power," saith He,"to lay down My life, and I have power
   to take it again. No man taketh it from Me, but I lay it down of
   Myself, and take it again." [1861]

   14. I have made good what I promised; I have established my
   propositions with, as I think, the strongest proofs and testimonies.
   Hold fast then what you have heard. I will recapitulate it briefly, and
   entrust it to be stored up in your minds as a thing, to my thinking, of
   the greatest usefulness. The Father was not born of the Virgin; yet
   this birth of the Son from the Virgin was the work both of the Father
   and the Son. The Father suffered not on the Cross; yet the Passion of
   the Son was the work both of the Father and the Son. The Father rose
   not again from the dead; yet the resurrection of the Son was the work
   both of the Father and the Son. You see then a distinction of Persons,
   and an inseparableness of operation. Let us not say therefore that the
   Father doeth any thing without the Son, or the Son any thing without
   the Father. But perhaps you have a difficulty as to the miracles which
   Jesus did, lest peradventure He did some which the Father did not!
   Where then is that saying, "The Father who dwelleth in Me, He doeth the
   works?" [1862] All that I have now said was plain; it needed to be
   barely mentioned; there was no necessity for much labour to make it
   understood, but only that care should be taken, that it might be
   brought to your remembrance.

   15. I wish to say something further, and here ask sincerely both for
   your more earnest attention, and your devotion to Godward. For none but
   bodies are held or contained in places suited to the nature [1863] of
   bodies. The Divinity is beyond all such places: let no one seek for it
   as though it were in space. It is everywhere invisible and inseparably
   present; not in one part greater, and another smaller; but whole
   everywhere, and nowhere divided. Who can see? Who can comprehend this?
   Let us restrain ourselves: let us remember who we are; and of Whom we
   speak. Let this and that, or whatever appertains [1864] to the nature
   of God, be with a pious faith embraced, with a holy respect
   entertained, and as far as is allowed us, as far as is possible for us,
   in an unspeakable sort understood. Let words be hushed: let the tongue
   be silent, let the heart be aroused, let the heart be lifted up
   thither. For it is not of such a nature as that it can ascend into the
   heart of man; but the heart of man must itself ascend to it. Let us
   consider the creatures ("for the invisible things of Him from the
   creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things
   that are made" [1865] ), if haply in the things which God hath made,
   with which we have some familiarity of intercourse, we may find some
   resemblance, whereby we may prove that there are some three things
   which may be exhibited [1866] as three separably, yet whose operation
   is inseparable.

   16. Come, brethren, give me your whole attention. But first of all
   consider what it is that I promise; if haply I can find any resemblance
   in the creature, for the Creator is too high above us. And peradventure
   some one of us, whose mind the glare of truth hath, as it were,
   stricken with sparks of its brightness, can say those words, "I said in
   my ecstasy."--What saidst thou in thine ecstasy?--"I am cast away from
   the sight of Thine eyes." [1867] For it seems to me as if he who said
   this had lifted up his soul unto God, and had been carried beyond
   himself, while they said daily unto him, "Where is thy God?"--had
   reached by a kind of spiritual contact to that unchangeable Light, and
   through the weakness [1868] of his sight had been unable to endure it,
   and so had fallen back again into his own, as it were, sick and languid
   state, and had compared himself with that Light, and had felt that the
   eye of his mind could not yet be attempered to the light of God's
   wisdom. And because he had done this in ecstasy, hurried away from his
   bodily senses, and taken [1869] up into God, when he was recalled in a
   manner from God to man, he said, "I said in my ecstasy." For I saw in
   ecstasy I know not what, which I could not long endure, and being
   restored to my mortal estate, [1870] and the manifold thoughts of
   mortal things from the body which presseth down the soul, I said, what?
   "I am cast away from the sight of Thine eyes." Thou art far above, and
   I am far below. What then, brethren, shall we say of God? For if thou
   hast been able to comprehend what thou wouldest say, it is not God; if
   thou hast been able to comprehend it, thou hast comprehended something
   else instead of God. If thou hast been able to comprehend Him as thou
   thinkest, by so thinking thou hast deceived thyself. This then is not
   God, if thou hast comprehended it; but if it be God, thou hast not
   comprehended it. How therefore wouldest thou speak of that which thou
   canst not comprehend?

   17. Let us see then, if haply we cannot find something in the creature
   whereby we may prove that some three things are exhibited [1871]
   separately whose operation is yet inseparable. But whither shall we go?
   To the heaven, to dispute of the sun and moon and stars? To the earth,
   to dispute of shrubs, and trees, and animals which fill the earth? Or
   of the heaven and the earth itself, which contain all the things that
   are in heaven and earth? How long, O man, wilt thou roam over the
   creation? Return unto thyself, see, consider, examine thine own self.
   Thou art searching among the creatures for some three things which are
   separately exhibited, whose operation is yet inseparable; if then thou
   art searching for this among the creatures, search for it first in
   thine own self. For thou art not other than a creature. It is a
   resemblance thou art searching for. Wouldest thou search for it among
   the cattle? For of God it was thou wast speaking, when thou wast in
   search for this resemblance. Thou wast speaking of the Trinity of
   Majesty ineffable, and because thou didst fail in contemplating [1872]
   the Divine Nature, and with becoming humility didst confess thine
   infirmity, thou didst come down to human nature; there then pursue
   thine enquiry. Wilt thou make thy search among the cattle, in the sun,
   or the stars? What of these was made after the image and likeness of
   God? Thou mayest search in thine own self for something more familiar
   to thee, and more excellent than all these. For God made man after His
   own image and likeness. Search then in thine own self, if haply the
   image of the Trinity bear not some vestige of the Trinity. And what is
   this image? It is an image very different from its model; yet different
   as it is, it is an image and a likeness notwithstanding, not indeed in
   the same way as the Son is the Image, being the Same Which the Father
   is. For an image is in one sort in a son, and in another in a mirror.
   There is great difference between them. Thine image in thy son is thine
   own self, for the son is by nature what thou art. In substance the same
   as thou, in person other than thou. Man then is not an image as the
   Only-begotten Son is, but made after a sort of image and likeness. Let
   him then search for something in himself, if so be he may find it, even
   for some three things which are exhibited [1873] separately, whose
   operation is yet inseparable. I will search, and do ye search with me.
   I will not search in you, but do ye search in yourselves, and I in
   myself. Let us search in concert, and in concert discuss our common
   nature and substance.

   18. See, O man, and consider whether what I am saying be true. Hast
   thou a body and flesh? I have, you say. For how am I in this place that
   I now occupy, and how do I move from place to place? How do I hear the
   words of one who is speaking, but by the ears of my body? How do I see
   the mouth of him who is speaking, but by the eyes of my body? It is
   plain then that thou hast a body, no need is there to trouble one's
   self about so plain a matter. Consider then another point, consider
   what it is that acts through this body. For thou hearest by means of
   the ear, but it is not the ear that hears. There is something else
   within which hears by means of the ear. Thou seest by means of the
   eye--examine this eye. What! hast thou acknowledged the house, and paid
   no regard to him that inhabiteth it? Doth the eye see by itself? Is it
   not another that sees by means of the eye? I will not say, that the eye
   of a dead man, from whose body it is plain the inhabitant hath
   departed, sees not, but any man's eye who is only thinking of something
   else, sees not the form of the object that is before him. Look then
   into thine inner man. For there it is rather that the resemblance must
   be sought for of some three things which are exhibited separately,
   whose operation is yet inseparable. What then is in thy mind?
   Peradventure if I search, I find many things there, but there is
   something very nigh at hand, which is understood more easily. What then
   is in thy soul? Call it to mind, reflect upon it. For I do not require
   that credit should be given me in what I am about to say; if thou find
   it not in thyself, admit it not. Look inward then; but first let us see
   what had escaped me, whether man be not the image, not of the Son only,
   or of the Father only, but of the Father and the Son, and so
   consequently of course of the Holy Ghost also. The words in Genesis
   are, "Let Us make man after Our own image and likeness." [1874] So then
   the Father doth not act without the Son, nor the Son without the
   Father. "Let Us make man after Our own image and likeness. Let us
   make," not, "I will make," or "Make thou," or "Let him make," but, "Let
   Us make after," not "thine image," or "mine," but, "after Our image."

   19. I am asking, I am speaking remember of a distant [1875]
   resemblance. So let no one say, See what he has compared to God! I have
   advertised you of this already, and by anticipation have both put you
   on your guard, and have guarded myself. The two are indeed very far
   removed from each other, as the lowest from the Highest, as the
   changeable from the Unchangeable, the created from the Creator, the
   human nature from the Divine. Lo! I apprise you of this at first, that
   no one may say ought against me, because there is so great a difference
   in the things whereof I am about to speak. Lest then while I am asking
   for your ears, ye should any of you be getting ready your teeth,
   remember I have undertaken merely to show, that there are some three
   things which are separately exhibited, whose operation is yet
   inseparable. How like or how unlike these things are to the Almighty
   Trinity is no concern of mine at present; but in the very creatures of
   the lowest order, and subject to change, we do find three things which
   may be separately exhibited, whose operation is yet inseparable. O
   carnal imagination! obstinate, unbelieving conscience! Why as
   concerning that ineffable Majesty dost thou doubt as to that thing,
   which thou canst discover in thine own self? For I ask thee, O man,
   hast thou memory? If not, how hast thou retained what I have said? But
   perhaps thou hast forgotten already what I said but a little while ago.
   Yet these very words, "I said"--these two syllables, thou couldest not
   retain except by memory. For how shouldest thou know they were two, if
   as the second sounded, thou hadst forgotten the first? But why do I
   dwell longer on this? Why am I so urgent? Why do I so press conviction?
   For thou hast memory; it is plain. I am searching then for something
   else. Hast thou understanding? "I have," you will say. For hadst thou
   not memory, thou couldest not retain what I said; and hadst thou not
   understanding, thou couldest not comprehend what thou hast retained.
   Thou hast then this as well as the other. Thou recallest thine
   understanding unto that which thou dost retain within, and so thou
   seest it, and by seeing art fashioned into that state as to be said to
   know. But I am searching for a third thing. Memory thou hast, whereby
   to retain what is said; and understanding thou hast, whereby to
   understand what is retained; but as touching these two, I ask again of
   thee, Hast thou not with thy will retained and understood? Undoubtedly,
   with my will, you will say. So then thou hast will.

   These are the three things which I promised I would bring home to your
   ears and minds. These three things are in thee, which thou canst
   number, but canst not separate. These three then, memory,
   understanding, and will--these three, I say, consider how they are
   separately exhibited, [1876] yet is their operation inseparable.

   20. The Lord will be my present help, and I see that He is present to
   help me; by your understanding what I say, I see that He is present to
   help me. For I perceive by these your voices how that you have
   understood me, and I surely trust that He will still assist us, that
   you may comprehend the whole. I promised to show you three things which
   are separately exhibited whose operation is yet inseparable. See then;
   I did not know what was in thy mind, and thou showedest me by saying,
   "Memory." This word, this sound, this expression came forth from thy
   mind to mine ears. For before that, thou hadst the silent idea of this
   memory, but thou didst not express it. It was in thee, but it had not
   yet come to me. But in order that that which was in thee might be
   passed on to me, thou didst express the very word, that is, "Memory." I
   heard it, I heard these three syllables in the word, "Memory." It is a
   noun, a word of three syllables, it sounded, and came to my ear, and
   impressed [1877] a certain idea on my mind. The sound has passed away,
   but the word whereby the idea was conveyed, and the idea itself,
   remains. But I ask, when thou didst pronounce this word, "Memory," thou
   seest certainly that it has reference to the memory only. For the other
   two things have their own proper names. For one is called "the
   understanding," and the other, "the will," not the "memory," but that
   one alone is called "memory." Nevertheless, whereby didst thou work in
   order to express this, in order to produce these three syllables? This
   word which has reference to the memory only, both memory was engaged in
   producing in thee, that thou mightest retain what thou saidst, and
   understanding, that thou mightest know what thou retainedst, and will,
   that thou mightest give expression to what thou knewest. Thanks be to
   the Lord our God! He hath helped us, both you and me. For I tell you
   the truth, beloved, that I undertook the examination and explanation of
   this subject with exceeding fear. For I was afraid lest haply I might
   gladden the spirit of the more enlarged in mind, and inflict on the
   slower capacities an afflictive weariness. But now I see both by the
   attention with which you have heard, and the quickness with which you
   have understood me, that you have not only caught what I have said, but
   that you have anticipated my words. Thanks be to the Lord!

   21. See then, henceforth I speak in all security of that which you have
   already understood; I am inculcating no unknown lesson, but am only
   conveying to you by recapitulation what you have already received. Now,
   of these three things, one only has been yet named and expressed;
   "Memory" is the name of one only of those three, yet all the three
   concurred in producing the name of this single one of the three. The
   single word "memory" could not be expressed, but by the operation of
   the will, and the understanding, and the memory. The single word
   "understanding" could not be expressed, but by the operation of the
   memory, the will, and the understanding; and the single word "will"
   could not be expressed, but by the operation of the memory and the
   understanding and the will. What I promised, then, I think has been
   explained, that which I have pronounced separately, I conceived
   inseparably. The three together have produced each one of these, but
   yet this one which the three have produced has reference not to the
   three, but to one. The three together have produced the word "memory,"
   but this word has reference to none but the memory only. The three
   together have produced the word "understanding," but it has reference
   to none but the understanding only. The three together have produced
   the word "will," but it has reference to none but the will only. So the
   Trinity concurred in the formation of the Body of Christ, but it
   belongs to none but Christ only. The Trinity concurred in the formation
   of the Dove from heaven; but it belongs to none but the Holy Spirit
   only. The Trinity formed the Voice from heaven, but this Voice belongs
   to none but the Father only.

   22. Let no one then say to me, no one with unfair cavils try to press
   upon my infirmity, saying, "Which then of these three, which you have
   shown to be in our mind or soul, which of them [1878] answers to the
   Father, that is, so to say, to the likeness of the Father, which of
   them to that of the Son, and which of them to that of the Holy Ghost?"
   I cannot say--I cannot explain this. Let us leave somewhat to
   meditation and to silence. Enter into thine own self; separate thyself
   from all tumult. Look into thine inner self; see if thou have there
   some sweet retiring place of conscience, where there may be no noise,
   no disputation, no strife, or debatings; where there will be not a
   thought of dissensions, and obstinate contention. Be meek to hear the
   word, that so thou mayest understand. Perhaps thou mayest soon have to
   say, "Thou wilt make me hear of joy and gladness, and my bones shall
   rejoice;" [1879] the bones, that is, which are humbled, not those that
   are lifted up.

   23. It is enough, then, that I have shown that there are some three
   things which are exhibited separately, whose operation is yet
   inseparable. If thou hast discovered this in thine own self; if thou
   hast discovered it in man; if thou hast discovered it in a being [1880]
   that walketh on the earth, and beareth about a frail "body, which
   weigheth down the soul;" believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
   may be exhibited separately, by certain visible symbols, by certain
   forms borrowed from the creatures, and still their operation be
   inseparable. This is enough. I do not say that "memory" is the
   Father,--the "understanding" the Son,--and "will" the Spirit; I do not
   say this; let men understand it how they will. I do not venture to say
   this. Let us reserve the greater truths for those who are capable of
   them: but, infirm as I am myself, I convey to the infirm only what is
   according to our powers. I do not say that these things are in any sort
   to be equalled with the Holy Trinity, to be squared after an analogy;
   that is, a kind of exact rule of comparison. This I do not say. But
   what do I say? See. I have discovered in thee three things, which are
   exhibited separately, whose operation is inseparable; and of these
   three, every single name is produced by the three together; yet does
   not this name belong to the three, but to some one of the three.
   Believe then in the Trinity, what thou canst not see, if in thyself
   thou hast heard, and seen, and retained it. For what is in thine own
   self thou canst know: but what is in Him who made thee, whatever it be,
   how canst thou know? And if thou shalt be ever able, thou art not able
   yet. And even when thou shalt be able, wilt thou be able so to know
   God, as He knoweth Himself? Let then this suffice you, beloved: I have
   said all I could; I have made good my promise as ye required. As to the
   rest which must be added, that your understanding may make advancement,
   this seek from the Lord.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1825] Commendari.

   [1826] Matt. iii. 14.

   [1827] Matt. iii. 15.

   [1828] Matt. iii. 17.

   [1829] Matt. iii. 13.

   [1830] Matt. iii. 16.

   [1831] Matt. iii. 17; Mark i. 11.

   [1832] Præsumptionis.

   [1833] Lectionis.

   [1834] Aperientes sinum.

   [1835] Wisd. ix. 15.

   [1836] Ps. lxxxvi. 4.

   [1837] Ps. xxvi. 9, Sept. (xxvii. English version).

   [1838] John i. 3.

   [1839] Satiate.

   [1840] Wisd. viii. 1.

   [1841] Ps. cxvi. 10.

   [1842] Fide, i.e. Symb. fidei (Ben.).

   [1843] Vegetamur.

   [1844] Litigatorum.

   [1845] Gal. iv. 4, 5.

   [1846] Isa. vii. 14.

   [1847] Vide Serm. i. (li.) 18.

   [1848] Gen. ii. 22.

   [1849] Num. xxxi. 18; Judg. xxi. 11.

   [1850] Phil. ii. 6, 7.

   [1851] Gal. iv. 4.

   [1852] i.e.the term made belongs to His birth in the flesh, Who was
   begotten in eternity.

   [1853] Rom. i. 3.

   [1854] Faciat Pater passionem Filii.

   [1855] Rom. viii. 32.

   [1856] Gal. ii. 20.

   [1857] Phil. ii. 9.

   [1858] John ii. 19.

   [1859] Ps. xli. 10.

   [1860] Reddentes.

   [1861] John x. 18.

   [1862] John xiv. 10.

   [1863] Corporalibus.

   [1864] Quidquid est quod Deus est.

   [1865] Rom. i. 20.

   [1866] Proferantur.

   [1867] Ps. xxxi. 22, Sept.

   [1868] See Aug Conf. B. xii. ch. 23-26.

   [1869] Subreptus.

   [1870] Membris.

   [1871] Demonstrari.

   [1872] Defecisti in divinis.

   [1873] Pronuntientur.

   [1874] Gen. i. 26.

   [1875] Dissimilem rem.

   [1876] Pronuntiari.

   [1877] Insinuavit.

   [1878] Pertinet.

   [1879] Ps. l. 10, Sept. (li. 8, English version).

   [1880] Personâ.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon III.

   [LIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. Chap. v. 3 and 8, "Blessed are the
   poor in spirit:" etc., but especially on that, "Blessed are the pure in
   heart: for they shall see God."

   1. By the return of the commemoration of a holy virgin, who gave her
   testimony to Christ, and was found worthy [1881] of a testimony from
   Christ, who was put to death openly, and crowned invisibly, I am
   reminded to speak to you, beloved, on that exhortation which the Lord
   hath just now uttered out of the Gospel, [1882] assuring us that there
   are many sources of a blessed life, which there is not a man that does
   not wish for. There is not a man surely can be found, who does not wish
   to be blessed. But oh! if as men desire the reward, so they would not
   decline the work that leads to it! Who would not run with all alacrity,
   were it told him, "Thou shalt be blessed"? Let him then also give a
   glad and ready ear when it is said, "Blessed, if thou shalt do thus."
   Let not the contest be declined, if the reward be loved; and let the
   mind be enkindled to an eager execution of the work, by the setting
   forth of the reward. What we desire, and wish for, and seek, will be
   hereafter; but what we are ordered to do for the sake of that which
   will be hereafter, must be now. Begin now, then, to recall to mind the
   divine sayings, and the precepts and rewards of the Gospel. "Blessed
   are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." [1883]
   The kingdom of heaven shall be thine hereafter; be poor in spirit now.
   Wouldest thou that the kingdom of heaven should be thine hereafter?
   Look well to thyself whose thou art now. Be poor in spirit. You ask me,
   perhaps, "What is to be poor in spirit?" No one who is puffed up is
   poor in spirit; therefore he that is lowly is poor in spirit. The
   kingdom of heaven is exalted; but "he who humbleth himself shall be
   exalted." [1884]

   2. Mark what follows: "Blessed," saith He, "are the meek, for they
   shall inherit the earth." [1885] Thou wishest to possess the earth now;
   take heed lest thou be possessed by it. If thou be meek, thou wilt
   possess it; if ungentle, thou wilt be possessed by it. And when thou
   hearest of the proposed reward, do not, in order that thou mayest
   possess the earth, unfold the lap of covetousness, whereby thou
   wouldest at present possess the earth, to the exclusion even of thy
   neighbour by whatever means; let no such imagination deceive thee. Then
   wilt thou truly possess the earth, when thou dost cleave to Him who
   made heaven and earth. For this is to be meek, not to resist thy God,
   that in that thou doest well He may be well-pleasing to thee, not thou
   to thyself; and in that thou sufferest ill justly, He may not be
   unpleasing to thee, but thou to thyself. For no small matter is it that
   thou shalt be well-pleasing to Him, when thou art displeased with
   thyself; whereas if thou art well-pleased with thine own self, thou
   wilt be displeasing to Him.

   3. Attend to the third lesson, "Blessed are they that mourn, for they
   shall be comforted." [1886] The work consisteth in mourning, the reward
   in consolation; for they who mourn in a carnal sort, what consolations
   have they? Miserable consolations, objects rather of fear. There the
   mourner is comforted by things which make him fear lest he have to
   mourn again. For instance, the death of a son causes the father sorrow,
   and the birth of a son joy. The one he has carried out to his burial,
   the other he has brought into the world; in the former is occasion of
   sadness, in the latter of fear: and so in neither is there consolation.
   That therefore will be the true consolation, wherein shall be given
   that which may not be lost, so that they may rejoice for their after
   consolation, who mourn that they are in [1887] exile now.

   4. Let us come to the fourth work and its reward, "Blessed are they
   that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled."
   [1888] Dost thou desire to be filled? Whereby? If the flesh long for
   fulness, after digestion thou wilt suffer hunger again. So He saith,
   "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again." [1889] If the
   remedy which is applied to a wound heal it, there is no more pain; but
   that which is applied against hunger, food that is, is so applied as to
   give relief only for a little while. For when the fulness is past,
   hunger returns. This remedy of fulness is applied day by day, yet the
   wound of weakness is not healed. Let us therefore "hunger and thirst
   after righteousness, that we may be filled" with that righteousness
   after which we now hunger and thirst. For filled we shall be with that
   for which we hunger and thirst. Let our inner man then hunger and
   thirst, for it hath its own proper meat and drink. "I," saith He, "am
   the Bread which came down from heaven." [1890] Here is the bread of the
   hungry; long also for the drink of the thirsty, "For with Thee is the
   well of life." [1891] )

   5. Mark what comes next: "Blessed are the merciful, for they shall
   obtain mercy." [1892] Do this, and so shall it be done to thee; deal so
   with others, that God may so deal with thee. For thou art at once in
   abundance and in want--in abundance of temporal things, in want of
   things eternal. The man whom thou hearest is a beggar, and thou art
   thyself God's beggar. Petition is made to thee, and thou makest thy
   petition. As thou hast dealt with thy petitioner, so shall God deal
   with His. Thou art at once full and empty; fill the empty with thy
   fulness, that thy emptiness may be filled with the fulness of God.

   6. Mark what comes next: "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall
   see God." [1893] This is the end of our love; an end whereby we are
   perfected, and not consumed. For there is an end of food, and an end of
   a garment; of food when it is consumed by the eating; of a garment when
   it is perfected in the weaving. Both the one and the other have an end;
   but the one is an end of consumption, the other of perfection.
   Whatsoever we now do, whatsoever we now do well, whatsoever we now
   strive for, or are in laudable sort eager for, or blamelessly desire,
   when we come to the vision of God, we shall require no more. For what
   need he seek for, with whom God is present? or what shall suffice him,
   whom God sufficeth not? We wish to see God, we seek, we kindle with
   desire to see Him. Who doth not? But mark what is said: "Blessed are
   the pure in heart, for they shall see God." Provide thyself then with
   that whereby thou mayest see Him. For (to speak after the flesh) how
   with weak eyes desirest thou the rising of the sun? Let the eye be
   sound, and that light will be a rejoicing, if it be not sound, it will
   be but a torment. For it is not permitted with a heart impure to see
   that which is seen only by the pure heart. Thou wilt be repelled,
   driven back from it, and wilt not see it. For "blessed are the pure in
   heart, for they shall see God." How often already hath he enumerated
   the blessed, and the causes of their blessedness, and their works and
   recompenses, their merits and rewards! But nowhere hath it been said,
   "They shall see God." "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
   the kingdom of heaven." "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit
   the earth." "Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted."
   "Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, they
   shall be filled." "Blessed are the merciful, they shall obtain mercy."
   In none of these hath it been said, "They shall see God." When we come
   to the "pure in heart," there is the vision of God promised. And not
   without good cause; for there, in the heart, are the eyes, by which God
   is seen. Speaking of these eyes, the Apostle Paul saith, "The eyes of
   your heart being enlightened." [1894] At present then these eyes are
   enlightened, as is suitable to their infirmity, by faith; hereafter as
   shall be suited to their strength, they shall be enlightened by sight.
   "For as long as we are in the body we are absent from the Lord; For we
   walk by faith, not by sight." [1895] Now as long as we are in this
   state of faith, what is said of us? "We see now through a glass darkly;
   but then face to face." [1896]

   7. Let no thought be entertained here of a bodily face. For if
   enkindled by the desire of seeing God, thou hast made ready thy bodily
   face to see Him, thou wilt be looking also for such a face in God. But
   if now thy conceptions of God are at least so spiritual as not to
   imagine Him to be corporeal (of which [1897] subject I treated
   yesterday at considerable length, if yet it was not in vain), if I have
   succeeded in breaking down in your heart, as in God's temple, that
   image of human form; if the words in which the Apostle expresses his
   detestation of those, "who, professing themselves to be wise became
   fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image
   made like unto corruptible man," [1898] have entered deep into your
   minds, and taken possession of your inmost heart; if ye do now detest
   and abhor such impiety, if ye keep clean for the Creator His own
   temple, if ye would that He should come and make His abode with you,
   "Think of the Lord with a good heart, and in simplicity of heart seek
   for Him." [1899] Mark well who it is to whom ye say, if so be ye do say
   it, and say it in sincerity, "My heart said to Thee, I will seek Thy
   face." Let thine heart also say, and add, "Thy face, Lord, will I
   seek." [1900] For so wilt thou seek it well, because thou seekest with
   thine heart. Scripture speaks of the "face of God, the arm of God, the
   hands of God, the feet of God, the seat of God," and His footstool; but
   think not in all this of human members. If thou wouldest be a temple of
   truth, break down the idol of falsehood. The hand of God is His power.
   The face of God is the knowledge of God. The feet of God are His
   presence. The seat of God, if thou art so minded, is thine own self.
   But perhaps thou wilt venture to deny that Christ is God! "Not so," you
   say. Dost thou grant this too, that "Christ is the power of God and the
   wisdom of God? [1901] "I grant it," you say. Hear then, "The soul of
   the righteous is the seat of wisdom." [1902] "Yes." For where hath God
   His seat, but where He dwelleth? And where doth He dwell, but in His
   temple? "For the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are." [1903]
   Take heed therefore how thou dost receive God. "God is a Spirit, and
   must be worshipped in spirit and in truth." [1904] Let the ark of
   testimony enter now into thy heart, if thou art so minded, and let
   Dagon fall. [1905] Now therefore give ear at once, and learn to long
   for God; learn to make ready that whereby thou mayest see God.
   "Blessed," saith He, "are the pure in heart, for they shall see God."
   Why dost thou make ready the eyes of the body? If He should be seen by
   them, that which should be so seen would be contained in space. But He
   who is wholly everywhere is not contained in space. Cleanse that
   whereby He may be seen.

   8. Hear and understand, if haply through His help I shall be able to
   explain it; and may He help us to the understanding of all the
   above-named works and rewards, how suitable rewards are apportioned to
   their corresponding duties. For where is there anything said of a
   reward which does not suit, and harmonize with its work? Because the
   lowly seem as it were aliens from a kingdom, He saith, "Blessed are the
   poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." Because meek men
   are easily despoiled of their land, [1906] He saith, "Blessed are the
   meek, for they shall inherit the land." [1907] Now the rest are plain
   at once; they are understood of themselves, and require no one to treat
   of them at length; they need only one to mention them. "Blessed are
   they that mourn." Now what mourner does not desire consolation? "They,"
   saith He, "shall be comforted." "Blessed are they that hunger and
   thirst after righteousness." What hungry and thirsty man does not seek
   to be filled? "And they," saith He, "shall be filled." "Blessed are the
   merciful." What merciful man but wishes that a return should be
   rendered him by God of His own work, that it may be so done to him, as
   he doeth to the poor? "Blessed," saith He, "are the merciful, for they
   shall obtain mercy." How in each case hath every duty its appropriate
   reward: and nothing is introduced in the reward which doth not suit the
   precept! For the precept is, that thou be "poor in spirit;" the reward,
   that thou shalt have the "kingdom of heaven." The precept is, that thou
   be "meek;" the reward, that thou shalt "possess the earth." The percept
   is, that thou "mourn;" the reward, that thou shalt be "comforted." The
   precept is, that thou "hunger and thirst after righteousness;" the
   reward, that thou shalt "be filled." The precept is, that thou be
   "merciful;" the reward, that thou shalt "obtain mercy." And so the
   precept is, that thou cleanse the heart; the reward, that thou shalt
   see God.

   9. But do not so conceive of these precepts and rewards, as to think
   when thou dost hear, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
   God," that the poor in spirit, or the meek, or they that mourn, or they
   who hunger and thirst after righteousness, or the merciful, will not
   see Him. Think not of those that are pure in heart, that they only will
   see Him, whilst the others will be excluded from the sight of Him. For
   all these several characters are the self-same persons. They shall all
   see; but they shall not see in that they are poor in spirit, or meek,
   or in that they mourn, and hunger and thirst after righteousness, or
   are merciful, but in that they are pure in heart. Just as if bodily
   works were duly assigned to the several members of the body, and one
   were to say for example, Blessed are they who have feet, for they shall
   walk; blessed are they that have hands, for they shall work; blessed
   are they that have a voice, for they shall cry aloud; blessed are they
   who have a mouth and tongue, for they shall speak; blessed are they
   that have eyes, for they shall see. Even so our Lord arranging in their
   order the members as it were of the soul, hath taught what is proper to
   each. Humility qualifies [1908] for the possession of the kingdom of
   heaven; meekness qualifies for possessing the earth; mourning for
   consolation; hunger and thirst after righteousness for being filled;
   mercy for the obtaining mercy; a pure heart for seeing God.

   10. If then we desire to see God, whereby shall our eye be purified?
   For who would not care for, and diligently seek the means of purifying
   that eye whereby he may see Him whom he longeth after with an entire
   affection? The Divine record has expressly mentioned this when it says,
   "purifying their hearts by faith." [1909] The faith of God then
   purifies the heart, the pure heart sees God. But because this faith is
   sometimes so defined by men who deceive themselves, as though it were
   enough only to believe (for some promise themselves even the sight of
   God and the kingdom of heaven, who believe and live evilly); against
   these, the Apostle James, incensed and indignant as it were with a holy
   [1910] charity, saith in his Epistle, "Thou believest there is one
   God." Thou applaudest thyself for thy faith, for thou markest how that
   many ungodly men think there are gods many, and thou rejoicest in
   thyself because thou dost believe that there is but one God; "Thou
   doest well: the devils also believe, and tremble." [1911] Shall they
   also see God? They shall see Him who are pure in heart. But who can say
   that unclean spirits are pure in heart? And yet they also "believe and
   tremble."

   11. Our faith then must be different from the faith of devils. For our
   faith purifies the heart; but their faith makes them guilty. For they
   do wickedly, and therefore say they to the Lord, "What have we to do
   with Thee?" When thou hearest the devils say this, thinkest thou that
   they do not acknowledge Him? "We know," they say, "who Thou art: Thou
   art the Son of God." [1912] This Peter says, and is commended; the
   devil says it, and is condemned. Whence cometh this, but that though
   the words be the same, the heart is different? Let us then make a
   distinction in our faith, and not be content to believe. This is no
   such faith as purifieth the heart. "Purifying their hearts," it is
   said, "by faith." [1913] But by what, and what kind of faith, save that
   which the Apostle Paul defines when he says, "Faith which worketh by
   love." [1914] That faith distinguishes us from the faith of devils, and
   from the infamous and abandoned conduct of men. "Faith," he says. What
   faith? "That which worketh by love," and which hopeth for what God doth
   promise. Nothing is more exact or perfect than this definition. There
   are then in faith these three things. He in whom that faith is which
   worketh by love, must necessarily hope for that which God doth promise.
   Hope therefore is the associate of faith. For hope is necessary as long
   as we see not what we believe, lest perhaps through not seeing, and by
   despairing to see, we fail. That we see not, doth make us sad; but that
   we hope we shall see, comforteth us. Hope then is here, and she is the
   associate of faith. And then charity also, by which we long, and strive
   to attain, and glow with desire, and hunger and thirst. This then is
   taken in also; and so there will be faith, hope, and charity. For how
   shall there not be charity there, since charity is nothing else but
   love? And this faith is itself defined as that "which worketh by love."
   Take away faith, and all thou believest perisheth; take away charity,
   and all that thou dost perisheth. For it is the province of faith to
   believe, of charity to do. For if thou believest without love, thou
   dost not apply thyself to good works; or if thou dost, it is as a
   servant, not as a son, through fear of punishment, not through love of
   righteousness. Therefore I say, that faith purifieth the heart, which
   worketh by love.

   12. And what does this faith effect at present? What does it by so many
   testimonies of Scripture, by its manifold lessons, its various and
   plentiful exhortations, but make us "see now through a glass darkly,
   and hereafter face to face." But return not now in thought again to
   this thy bodily face. Think only of the face of the heart. Force,
   compel, press thine heart to think of things divine. Whatsoever occurs
   to thy mind that is like to a body, throw it off from thee. If thou
   canst not yet say, "It is this," yet at least say, "It is not this."
   For when wilt thou be able to say, "This is God"? Not even then, when
   thou shall see Him; for what thou shalt then see is ineffable. Thus the
   Apostle says, that he "was caught up into the third heaven, and heard
   ineffable words." [1915] If the words are ineffable, what is He whose
   words they are? Therefore as thou dost think of God, perchance there is
   presented to thee the idea of some human figure of marvellous and
   exceeding greatness, and thou hast set it before the eyesof thy mind as
   something very great, and grand, and of vast extension. Still somewhere
   thou hast set bounds to it. If thou hast, it is not God. But if thou
   hast not set bounds to it, where can the face be? Thou art fancying to
   thyself some huge body, and in order to distinguish the members in it,
   thou must needs set bounds to it. For in no other way but by setting
   bounds to this large body, canst thou distinguish the members. But what
   art thou about, O foolish and carnal imagination! Thou hast made a
   large bulky body, and so much the larger, as thou hast thought the more
   to honour God. Another adds one cubit to it, and makes it greater than
   before.

   13. But "I have read," you will say. What hast thou read, who hast
   understood nothing? Yet tell me, what hast thou read? Let us not thrust
   back the babe in understanding with his play. Tell me, what hast thou
   read? "Heaven is My throne, and the earth is My footstool." [1916] I
   hear thee; I have read it also: but it may be that thou thinkest
   thyself to have the advantage, in that thou hast both read and
   believed. But I also believe what thou hast just said. Let us then
   believe it together. What do I say? Let us search it out together. Lo!
   hold fast what thou hast so read and believed; "Heaven is My throne
   (that is, "my seat," for "throne," [1917] in Greek, is "seat," [1918]
   in Latin), and the earth is My footstool." But hast thou not read these
   words as well, "Who has meted out the heaven with the palm of His
   hand?" [1919] I conclude that thou hast read them; thou dost
   acknowledge them, and confess that thou believest them; for in that
   book we read both the one and the other, and believe both. But now
   think a while, and teach me. I make thee my teacher, and myself the
   little one. Teach me, I pray thee, "Who is He that sitteth on the palm
   of His hand?"

   14. See, thou hast drawn the figure and lineaments of the members of
   God from a human body. And perhaps it has occurred to thee to think,
   that it is according to the body that we were made after the Image of
   God. I will admit this idea for a time to be considered, and canvassed,
   and examined, and by disputation to be thoroughly sifted. Now then, if
   it please thee, hear me; for I heard thee in what thou wast pleased to
   say. God sitteth in heaven, and meteth out the heaven with His palm.
   What! doth the same heaven become broad when it is God's seat, and
   narrow, when He meteth it out? Or is [1920] God when sitting, limited
   to the measure of His palm? If this be so, God did not make us after
   His likeness, for the palm of our hand is much narrower than that part
   of the body whereon we sit. But if He be as broad in His palm as in His
   sitting, He hath made our members quite unlike His. There is no
   resemblance here. Let the Christian then blush to set up such an idol
   in his heart as this. Wherefore take heaven for all saints. For the
   earth also is spoken of all who are in the earth, "Let all the earth
   worship Thee." [1921] If we may properly say with regard to those who
   dwell on the earth, "Let all the earth worship Thee," we may with the
   same propriety say also as to those who dwell in heaven, "Let all the
   heaven bear Thee." For even the Saints who dwell on earth, though in
   their body they tread the earth, in heart dwell in heaven. For it is
   not in vain that they are reminded to "lift up their hearts," [1922]
   and when they are so reminded, they answer, "that they lift them up:"
   nor in vain is it said, "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those
   things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God.
   Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth."
   [1923] In so far therefore as they have their conversation there, they
   do bear God, and they are heaven; because they are the seat of God; and
   when they declare the words of God, "The heavens declare the glory of
   God." [1924]

   15. Return then with me to the face of the heart, and make it ready.
   That to which God speaketh is within. The ears, and eyes, and all the
   rest of the visible members, are either the dwelling place or the
   instrument of some thing within. It is the inner man where Christ doth
   dwell, now [1925] by faith, and hereafter He will dwell in it, by the
   presence of His Divinity, when we shall have known "what is the length,
   and breadth, and depth, and height; when we shall have known also the
   love of Christ that surpasseth knowledge, that we may be filled with
   all the fulness of God." [1926] Now then if thou wouldest enter into
   the meaning of these words, summon all thy powers [1927] to comprehend
   the breadth, and length, and height, and depth. Wander not in the
   imagination of the thoughts through the spaces of the world, and the
   yet comprehensible extent of this so vast a body. Look for what I am
   speaking of in thine own self. The "breadth" is in good works; the
   "length" is in long-suffering and perseverance in well-doing; the
   "height" is in the expectation of rewards above, for which height's
   sake thou art bidden "to lift up thy heart." Do well, and persevere in
   well-doing, because of God's reward. Esteem earthly things as nothing,
   lest, when this earth shall be smitten with any scourge of that wise
   One, thou say that thou hast worshipped God in vain, hast done good
   works in vain, hast persevered in good works in vain. For by doing good
   works thou hadst as it were the "breadth," by persevering in them thou
   hadst as it were the "length;" but by seeking earthly things thou hast
   not had the "height." Now observe the "depth;" it is the grace of God
   in the secret dispensation of His will. "For who hath known the mind of
   the Lord? or who hath been His counsellor?" [1928] and, "Thy judgments
   are as a great depth." [1929]

   16. This conversation of well-doing, of perseverance in well-doing, of
   hoping for rewards above, of the secret dispensation of the grace of
   God, in wisdom not in foolishness, nor yet in finding fault, because
   one man is after this manner and another after that; for "there is no
   iniquity with God;" [1930] apply this, I say, if you think good, also
   to the Cross of thy Lord. For it was not without a meaning [1931] that
   He chose this kind of death, in whose power it was even either to die
   or not. Now if it was in His power to die or not, why was it not in His
   power also to die in this or the other manner! Not without a meaning
   then did He select the Cross, whereby to crucify thee to this world.
   For the "breadth" is the transverse beam in the cross where the hands
   are fastened, to signify good works. The "length" is in that part of
   the wood which reaches from this transverse beam to the ground. For
   there the body is crucified and in a manner stands, and this standing
   signifies perseverance. Now "the height" is in that part, which from
   the same transverse beam projects upward to the head, and hereby is
   signified the expectation of things above. And where is the "depth" but
   in that part which is fixed in the ground? For so is the dispensation
   of grace, hidden and in secret. It is not seen itself, but from thence
   is projected all that is seen. After this, when thou shalt have
   comprehended all these things, not in the mere understanding but in
   action also ("for a good understanding have all they that do
   hereafter)," [1932] then if thou canst, stretch out thyself to attain
   to the knowledge of the "love of Christ which passeth knowledge." When
   thou hast attained to it, thou "wilt be filled with all the fulness of
   God." Then will be fulfilled the "face to face." Now thou wilt be
   filled with all the fulness of God, not as if God should be full of
   thee, but so that thou shalt be full of God. Seek there, if thou canst,
   for any bodily face. Away with such trifles from the eye of the mind.
   Let the child cast away his playthings, and learn to handle more
   serious matters. And in many things we are but children; and when we
   were more so than we are, we were borne with by our betters. "Follow
   peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see God."
   [1933] For by this is the heart purified; for that in it is that faith
   "which worketh by love." Hence, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for
   they shall see God."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1881] Meruit.

   [1882] This portion of St. Matthew is the gospel during the whole
   octave of All Saints, as in our own Church on All Saints' Day; the
   corresponding portion of St. Luke is read in the Comm. Plur. Mart.

   [1883] Matt. v. 3.

   [1884] Luke xiv. 11 and xviii. 14.

   [1885] Matt. v. 5 (4, Vulgate).

   [1886] Matt. v. 4 (5, Vulgate).

   [1887] Peregrinari.

   [1888] Matt. v. 6.

   [1889] John iv. 13.

   [1890] John vi. 41.

   [1891] Ps. xxxvi. 9.

   [1892] Matt. v. 7.

   [1893] Matt. v. 8.

   [1894] Eph. i. 18.

   [1895] 2 Cor. v. 6, 7.

   [1896] 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

   [1897] Probably the Sermon xxiii., on Ps. lxxiii. 23, seu de visione
   Dei (Ben.).

   [1898] Rom. i. 22, 23.

   [1899] Wisd. i. 1.

   [1900] Ps. xxvi. 8, Sept. (xxvii. English version).

   [1901] 1 Cor. i. 24.

   [1902] Wisd. i.

   [1903] 1 Cor. iii. 17.

   [1904] John iv. 24.

   [1905] 1 Sam. v. 3.

   [1906] Terra.

   [1907] Terram.

   [1908] Apta est.

   [1909] Acts xv. 9.

   [1910] Spiritali.

   [1911] Jas. ii. 19.

   [1912] Luke iv. 34; Matt. xvi. 16.

   [1913] Acts xv. 9.

   [1914] Gal. v. 6.

   [1915] 2 Cor. xii. 2-4.

   [1916] Isa. lxvi. 1.

   [1917] Thronus.

   [1918] Sedes.

   [1919] Isa. xl. 12.

   [1920] An ipse Deus tantus est in sedendo quantus in palmo.

   [1921] Ps. lxv. 4, Sept. (lxvi. English version).

   [1922] In the Communion Office.

   [1923] Col. iii. 1, 2.

   [1924] Ps. xix. 1.

   [1925] Interim.

   [1926] Eph. iii. 17, etc.

   [1927] Si tibi intellectus hic non displicet advoca te comprehendere.

   [1928] Rom. xi. 34.

   [1929] Ps. xxxvi. 6.

   [1930] 2 Chron. xix. 7; Rom. ix. 14.

   [1931] Frustra.

   [1932] Ps. cxi. 10.

   [1933] Heb. xii. 14.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon IV.

   [LIV. Ben.]

   On that which is written in the Gospel, Matt. v. 16, "Even so let your
   light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
   your Father Who is in Heaven:" and contrariwise, Chap. vi., "Take heed
   that ye do not your righteousness before men, to be seen of them."

   1. It is wont to perplex many persons, Dearly beloved, that our Lord
   Jesus Christ in His Evangelical Sermon, after He had first said, "Let
   your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
   glorify your Father which is in heaven;" [1934] said afterwards, "Take
   heed that ye do not your righteousness [1935] before men to be seen of
   them." [1936] For so the mind of him who is weak in understanding is
   disturbed, is desirous to obey both precepts, and distracted by
   diverse, and contradictory commandments. For a man can as little obey
   but one master, if he give contradictory orders, as he can serve two
   masters, [1937] which the Saviour Himself hath testified in the same
   Sermon to be impossible. What then must the mind that is in this
   hesitation do, when it thinks that it cannot, and yet is afraid not to
   obey? For if he set his good works in the light to be seen of men, that
   he may fulfil the command, "Let your light so shine before men, that
   they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
   heaven;" he will think himself involved in guilt because he has done
   contrary to the other precept which says, "Take heed that ye do not
   your righteousness before men to be seen of them." And again, if
   fearing and avoiding this, he conceal his good works, he will think
   that he is not obeying Him who commands, saying, "Let your light shine
   before men, that they may see your good works."

   2. But he who is of a right understanding, fulfils both, and will obey
   in both the Universal Lord of all, who would not condemn the slothful
   servant, if he commanded those things which could by no means be done.
   For give ear to "Paul, the servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an
   Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of God," [1938] both doing and
   teaching both duties. See how his "light shineth before men, that they
   may see his good works. We commend ourselves," saith he, "to every
   man's conscience in the sight of God." [1939] And again, "For we
   provide things honest, not only in the sight of God, but also in the
   sight of men." [1940] And again, "Please all men in all things, even as
   I please all men in all things." [1941] See, on the other hand, how he
   takes heed, that he "do not his righteousness before men to be seen of
   them. Let every man," saith he, "prove his own work, and then shall he
   have glorying in himself, and not in another." [1942] And again, "For
   our glorying is this, the testimony of our conscience." [1943] And
   that, than which nothing is plainer, "If," saith he, "I yet pleased
   men, I should not be the servant of Christ." [1944] But lest any of
   those who are perplexed about the precepts of our Lord Himself as
   contradictory, should much more raise a question against His Apostle
   and say, How sayest thou, "Please all men in all things, even as I also
   please all men in all things:" and yet also sayest, "If I yet pleased
   men; I should not be the servant of Christ"? May the Lord Himself be
   with us, who spake also in His servant and Apostle, and open to us His
   will, and give us the means of obeying it.

   3. The very words of the Gospel carry with them their own explanation;
   nor do they shut the mouths of those who hunger, seeing they feed the
   hearts of them that knock. The intention of a man's heart, its
   direction and its aim, is what is to be regarded. For if he who wishes
   his good works to be seen of men, sets before men his own glory and
   advantage, and seeks for this in the sight of men, he does not fulfil
   either of those precepts which the Lord has given as touching this
   matter; because He has at once looked to "doing his righteousness
   before men to be seen of them;" and his light has not so shined before
   men that they should see his good works, and glorify His Father which
   is in heaven. It was himself he wished to be glorified, not God; he
   sought his own advantage, and loved not the Lord's will. Of such the
   Apostle says, "For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
   Christ's." [1945] Accordingly, the sentence was not finished at the
   words, "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
   works;" but there was immediately subjoined why this was to be done;
   "that they may glorify your Father which is in heaven;" that when a man
   who does good works is seen of men, he may have only the intention of
   the good work in his own conscience, but may have no intention of being
   known, save for the praise of God, for their advantage-sake to whom he
   is thus made known; for to them this advantage comes, that God who has
   given this power to man begins to be well-pleasing to them; and so they
   do not despair, but that the same power might be vouchsafed to
   themselves also if they would. And so He did not conclude the other
   precept, "Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before men,"
   otherwise than in the words, "to be seen of them;" nor did He add in
   this case, "that they may glorify your Father which is in heaven," but
   rather, "otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in
   heaven." For by this He shows us, that they who are such, as He will
   not have His faithful ones to be, seek a reward in this very thing,
   that they are seen of men--that it is in this they place their good--in
   this that they delight the vanity of their heart--in this is their
   emptiness, and inflation, their swelling, and wasting away. For why was
   it not sufficient to say, "Take heed that ye do not your righteousness
   before men," but that he added, "that ye may be seen of them," except
   because there are some who do their "righteousness before men;" not
   that they may be seen of them, but that the works themselves may be
   seen; and the Father which is in heaven, who hath vouchsafed to endow
   with these gifts the ungodly whom He had justified, may be glorified?

   4. They who are such, neither do they account their righteousness as
   their own, but His, by the faith of whom they live (whence also the
   Apostle says, "That I may win Christ, and be found in Him, not having
   mine own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is of the
   faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith;" [1946]
   and in another place, "That we may be the righteousness of God in Him."
   [1947] Whence also he finds fault with the Jews in these words, "Being
   ignorant of God's righteousness, and wishing to establish their own
   righteousness, they have not submitted themselves to the righteousness
   of God" [1948] ). Whosoever then wish their good works to be so seen of
   men, that He may be glorified from whom they have received those things
   which are seen in them, and that thereby those very persons who see
   them, may through the dutifulness [1949] of faith be provoked to
   imitate the good, their light shines truly before men, because there
   beams forth from them the light of charity; theirs is no mere empty
   fume of pride; and in the very act they take precautions, that they do
   not their righteousness before men to be seen of them, in that they do
   not reckon that righteousness as their own, nor do they therefore do it
   that they may be seen; but that He may be made known, who is praised in
   them that are justified, that so He may bring to pass in him that
   praises that which is praised in others, that is, that He may make him
   that praises to be himself the object of praise. Observe the Apostle
   too, how that when he had said, "Please all men in all things, as I
   also please all men in all things;" [1950] he did not stop there, as if
   he had placed in that, namely, the pleasing men, the end of his
   intention; for else he would have said falsely, "If I yet pleased men,
   I should not be the servant of Christ;" but he subjoined immediately
   why it was that he pleased men; "Not seeking," saith he, "mine own
   profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved." [1951] So he
   at once did not please men for his own profit, lest he should not be
   "the servant of Christ;" and he did please men for their salvation's
   sake, that he might be a faithful Minister of Christ; because for him
   his own conscience in the sight of God was enough, and from him there
   shined forth in the sight of men something which they might imitate.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1934] Matt. v. 16.

   [1935] Justitiam, Vulgate.

   [1936] Matt. vi. 1.

   [1937] Matt. vi. 24.

   [1938] Rom. i. 1.

   [1939] 2 Cor. iv. 2.

   [1940] 2 Cor. viii. 21.

   [1941] 1 Cor. x. 33.

   [1942] Gal. vi. 4.

   [1943] 2 Cor. i. 12.

   [1944] Gal. i. 10.

   [1945] Phil. ii. 21.

   [1946] Phil. iii. 8, 9.

   [1947] 2 Cor. v. 21.

   [1948] Rom. x. 3.

   [1949] Pietate.

   [1950] 1 Cor. x. 33.

   [1951] 1 Cor. x. 33.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon V.

   [LV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. v. 22, "Whosoever shall say to his
   brother, thou fool, shall be in danger of the hell of fire."

   1. The section of the Holy Gospel which we just now heard when it was
   read, must have sorely alarmed us, if we have faith; but those who have
   not faith, it alarmed not. And because it does not alarm them, they are
   minded to continue in their false security, as knowing not how to
   divide and distinguish the proper times of security and fear. Let him
   then who is leading now that life which has an end, fear, that in that
   life which is without end, he may have security. Therefore were we
   alarmed. For who would not fear Him who speaketh the truth, and saith,
   "Whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
   hell fire." [1952] Yet "the tongue can no man tame." [1953] Man tames
   the wild beast, yet he tames not his tongue; he tames the lion, yet he
   bridles not his own speech; he tames all else, yet he tames not
   himself; he tames what he was afraid of, and what he ought to be afraid
   of, in order that he may tame himself, that he does not fear. But how
   is this? It is a true sentence, and came forth from an oracle of truth,
   "But the tongue can no man tame."

   2. What shall we do then, my brethren? I see that I am speaking indeed
   to a large assembly, yet, seeing that we are one in Christ, let us take
   counsel as it were in secret. No stranger heareth us, we are all one,
   because we are all united in one. [1954] What shall we do then?
   "Whosoever saith to his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell
   fire: But the tongue can no man tame." Shall all men go into hell fire?
   God forbid! "Lord, Thou art our refuge from generation to generation:"
   [1955] Thy wrath is just: Thou sendest no man into hell unjustly.
   "Whither shall I go from Thy Spirit?" [1956] and whither shall I flee
   from Thee, but to Thee? Let us then understand, Dearly beloved, that if
   no man can tame the tongue, we must have recourse to God, that He may
   tame it. For if thou shouldest wish to tame it, thou canst not, because
   thou art a man. "The tongue can no man tame." Observe a like instance
   to this in the case of those beasts which we do tame. The horse does
   not tame himself; the camel does not tame himself; the elephant does
   not tame himself; the viper does not tame himself; the lion does not
   tame himself; and so also man does not tame himself. But that the
   horse, and ox, and camel, and elephant, and lion, and viper, may be
   tamed, man is sought for. Therefore let God be sought to, that man may
   be tamed.

   3. Therefore, "O Lord, art Thou become our refuge." To Thee do we
   betake ourselves, and with Thy help it will be well with us. For ill is
   it with us by ourselves. Because we have left Thee, Thou hast left us
   to ourselves. Be we then found in Thee, for in ourselves were we lost.
   "Lord, Thou art become our refuge." Why then, brethren, should we doubt
   that the Lord will make us gentle, if we give up ourselves to be tamed
   by him? Thou hast tamed the lion which thou madest not; shall not He
   tame thee, who made thee? For from whence didst thou get the power to
   tame such savage beasts? Art thou their equal in bodily strength? By
   what power then hast thou been able to tame great beasts? The very
   beasts of burden, as they are called, are by their nature wild. For in
   their untamed state they are unserviceable. But because custom has
   never known them except as in the hands and under the bridle and power
   of men, dost thou imagine that they could have been born in this tame
   state? But now at all events mark the beasts which are unquestionably
   of savage kind. "The lion roareth, who doth not fear?" [1957] And yet
   wherein is it that thou dost find thyself to be stronger than he? Not
   in strength of body, but in the interior reason of the mind. Thou art
   stronger than the lion, in that wherein thou wast made after the image
   of God. What! Shall the image of God tame a wild beast; and shall not
   God tame His own image?

   4. In Him is our hope; let us submit ourselves to Him, and entreat His
   mercy. In Him let us place our hope, and until we are tamed, and tamed
   thoroughly, that is, are perfected, let us bear our Tamer. For
   oftentimes does our Tamer bring forth His scourge too. For if thou dost
   bring forth the whip to tame thy beasts, shall not God do so to tame
   His beasts (which we are), who of His beasts will make us His sons?
   Thou tamest thine horse; and what wilt thou give thy horse, when he
   shall have begun to carry thee gently, to bear thy discipline, to obey
   thy rule, to be thy faithful, useful [1958] beast? How dost thou repay
   him, who wilt not so much as bury him when he is dead, but cast him
   forth to be torn by the birds of prey? Whereas when thou art tamed, God
   reserveth for thee an inheritance, which is God Himself, and though
   dead for a little time, He will raise thee to life again. He will
   restore to thee thy body, even to the full number of thy hairs; and
   will set thee with the Angels for ever, where thou wilt need no more
   His taming hand, but only to be possessed by His exceeding [1959]
   mercy. For God will then be "all in all;" [1960] neither will there be
   any unhappiness to exercise us, but happiness alone to feed us. Our God
   will be Himself our Shepherd; our God will be Himself our Cup; [1961]
   our God will be Himself our glory; our God will be Himself our wealth.
   What multiplicity of things soever thou seekest here, He alone will be
   Himself all these things to thee.

   5. Unto this hope is man tamed, and shall his Tamer then be deemed
   intolerable? Unto this hope is man tamed, and shall he murmur against
   his beneficent Tamer, if He chance to use the scourge? Ye have heard
   the exhortation of the Apostle, "If ye are without chastening, ye are
   bastards, and not sons; [1962] for what son is he whom the father
   chasteneth not? Furthermore," he says, "we have had fathers of our
   flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall we not much
   rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live?" [1963] For
   what could thy father do for thee, that he corrected and chastised
   thee, brought out the scourge and beat thee? Could he make thee live
   for ever? What he could not do for himself, how should he do for thee?
   For some paltry sum of money which he had gathered together by usury
   and travail, did he discipline thee by the scourge, that the fruit of
   his labour when left to thee might not be squandered by thy evil
   living. Yes, he beats his son, as fearing lest his labours should be
   lost; forasmuch as he left to thee what he could neither retain here,
   nor carry away. For he did not leave thee anything here which could be
   his own; he went off, that so thou mightest come on. But thy God, thy
   Redeemer, thy Tamer, thy Chastiser, thy Father, instructeth thee. To
   what end? That thou mayest receive an inheritance, when thou shalt not
   have to carry thy father to his grave, but shall have thy Father
   Himself for thine inheritance. Unto this hope art thou instructed, and
   dost thou murmur? and if any sad chance befall thee, dost thou (it may
   be) blaspheme? Whither wilt thou go from His Spirit? But now He letteth
   thee alone, and doth not scourge thee; or He abandoneth thee in thy
   blaspheming; shalt thou not experience His judgment? Is it not better
   that He should scourge thee and receive thee, than that He should spare
   thee and abandon thee?

   6. Let us say then to the Lord our God, "Lord, Thou art become our
   refuge from generation to generation." In the first and second
   generations Thou art become our refuge. Thou wast our refuge, that we
   might be born, who before were not. Thou wast our refuge, that we might
   be born anew, who were evil. Thou wast a refuge to feed those that
   forsake Thee. Thou art a refuge to raise up and direct Thy children.
   "Thou art become our refuge." We will not go back from Thee, when Thou
   hast delivered us from all our evils, and filled us with Thine own good
   things. Thou givest good things now, Thou [1964] dealest softly with
   us, that we be not wearied in the way; Thou dost correct, and chastise,
   and smite, and direct us, that we may not wander from the way. Whether
   therefore Thou dealest softly with us, that we be not wearied in the
   way, or chastisest us, that we wander not from the way, "Thou art
   become our refuge, O Lord."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1952] Matt. v. 22.

   [1953] Jas. iii. 8.

   [1954] In unum.

   [1955] Ps. lxxxix. 1, Sept. (xc. English version).

   [1956] Ps. cxxxix. 7.

   [1957] Amos iii. 8.

   [1958] There is a paranomasia here in the original, which it is not
   possible to preserve in the translation: "Esse jumentum, hoc est
   adjumentum infirmitatis suæ."

   [1959] Piissimo.

   [1960] 1 Cor. xv. 28.

   [1961] Potus.

   [1962] Heb. xii. 8.

   [1963] Heb. xii. 7, 9.

   [1964] Blandiris.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon VI.

   [LVI. Ben.]

   On the Lord's Prayer in St. Matthew's Gospel, Chap. vi. 9, etc. to the
   Competentes. [1965]

   1. The blessed Apostle, to show that those times when it should come to
   pass that all the nations should believe in Christ had been foretold by
   the Prophets, produced this testimony where it is written, "And it
   shall be, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be
   saved." [1966] For before time the name of the Lord who made heaven and
   earth was called upon amongst the Israelites only; the rest of the
   nations called upon dumb and deaf idols, by whom they were not heard,
   or by devils, by whom they were heard to their harm. "But when the
   fulness of time came," that was fulfilled which had been foretold, "And
   it shall be, that whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall
   be saved." Moreover, because the Jews, even those who believed in
   Christ, grudged the Gospel to the Gentiles, and said that the Gospel
   ought not to be preached to them who were not circumcised; because
   against these the Apostle Paul alleged this testimony, "And it shall
   be, that whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be
   saved;" [1967] he immediately subjoined, to convince those who were
   unwilling that the Gospel should be preached to the Gentiles, the
   words, "But how shall they call upon Him, in whom they have not
   believed? or how shall they believe in Him of whom they have not heard?
   or how shall they hear without a preacher? or how shall they preach
   except they be sent?" Because then he said, "how shall they call upon
   Him in whom they have not believed?" ye have not first learnt the
   Lord's Prayer, and after that the Creed; but first the Creed, where ye
   might know what to believe, and afterwards the Prayer, where ye might
   know whom to call upon. The Creed then has respect to the faith, the
   Lord's Prayer to prayer; because it is he who believeth, that is heard
   when he calleth.

   2. But many ask for what they ought not to ask, not knowing what is
   expedient for them. Two things therefore must he that prays beware of;
   that he ask not what he ought not; and that he ask not from whom he
   ought not. From the devil, from idols, from evil spirits, [1968] must
   nothing be asked. From the Lord our God Jesus Christ, God the Father of
   Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs, from the Father of our Lord Jesus
   Christ, from God who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things in
   them, from Him must we ask whatsoever we have to ask. But we must
   beware that we ask not of Him that which we ought not to ask. If
   because we ought to ask for life, thou ask it of dumb and deaf idols,
   what doth it profit thee? So if from God the Father, who is in heaven,
   thou dost wish for the death of thine enemies, what doth it profit
   thee? Hast thou not heard or read in the Psalm, in which the damnable
   end of the traitor Judas is foretold, how the prophecy spake of him,
   "Let his prayer be turned into sin?" [1969] If then thou risest up, and
   prayest for evil on thine enemies, thy "prayer will be turned into
   sin."

   3. You have read in the Holy Psalms, how that he who speaks in them
   imprecates, as it would seem, many curses upon his enemies. And surely,
   one may say, he who speaks in the Psalms is a righteous man; wherefore
   then does he so wish evil upon his enemies? He does not wish, but he
   foresees, it is a prophecy of one who is telling things to come, not a
   vow of malediction; for the prophets knew by the Spirit to whom evil
   was appointed to happen, and to whom good; and by prophecy they spake
   as if they wished for what they did foresee. But how canst thou know
   whether he for whom today thou art asking evil, may not to-morrow be a
   better man than thyself? But you will say, I know him to be a wicked
   man. Well: thou must know that thou art wicked too. Although it may be
   thou takest upon thyself to judge of another's heart what thou dost not
   know; but as for thine own self thou knowest that thou art wicked.
   Hearest thou not the Apostle saying, "Who was before a blasphemer, and
   a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it
   ignorantly in unbelief?" [1970] Now when the Apostle Paul persecuted
   the Christians, binding them wherever he found them, and drew them to
   the Chief Priests to be questioned and punished, what think ye,
   brethren, did the Church pray against him, or for him? Surely the
   Church of God which had learnt instruction from her Lord, who said as
   He hung upon the Cross, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what
   they do," [1971] so prayed for Paul (or rather as yet Saul), that that
   might be wrought in him which was wrought. For in that he says, "But I
   was unknown by face to the churches of Judæa which are in Christ: only
   they heard that he who persecuted us in times past, now preacheth the
   faith which once he destroyed; and they magnified God in me;" [1972]
   why did they magnify God, but because they asked this of God, before it
   came to pass?

   4. Our Lord then first of all cut off "much speaking," that thou
   mightest not bring a multitude of words unto God, as though by thy many
   words thou wouldest teach Him. Therefore when thou prayest thou hast
   need of piety, not of wordiness. "For your Father knoweth what is
   needful for you, before ye ask Him." [1973] Be ye loth then to use many
   words, for He knoweth what is needful for you. But lest peradventure
   any should say here, If He know what is needful for us, why should we
   use so much as a few words? why should we pray at all? He knoweth
   Himself; let Him then give what He knoweth to be needful for us. Yes,
   but it is His will that thou shouldest pray, that He may give to thy
   longings, that His gifts may not be lightly esteemed; seeing He hath
   Himself formed this longing desire in us. The words therefore which our
   Lord Jesus Christ hath taught us in His prayer, are the rule and
   standard of our desires. Thou mayest not ask for anything but what is
   written there.

   5. "Do ye therefore say," saith he, "Our Father, which art in heaven."
   Where ye see ye have begun to have God for your Father. Ye will have
   Him, when ye are new born. Although even now before ye are born, ye
   have been conceived of His seed, as being on the eve of being brought
   forth in the font, the womb as it were of the Church. "Our Father,
   which art in heaven." Remember then, that ye have a Father in heaven.
   Remember that ye were born of your father Adam unto death, that ye are
   to be born anew of God the Father unto life. And what ye say, say in
   your hearts. Only let there be the earnest affection of prayer, and
   there will be the effectual [1974] answer of Him who heareth prayer.
   "Hallowed be thy Name." Why dost thou ask, that God's Name may be
   hallowed? It is holy. Why then askest thou for that which is already
   holy? And then when thou dost ask that His Name may be hallowed, dost
   thou not as it were pray to Him for Him, and not for thyself? No.
   Understand it aright, and it is for thine own self thou askest. For
   this thou askest, that what is always in itself holy, may be hallowed
   in thee. What is "be hallowed?" "Be accounted holy," be not despised.
   So then you see, that the good thou dost wish, thou wishest for thine
   own self. For if thou despise the Name of God, for thyself it will be
   ill, and not for God.

   6. "Thy kingdom come." [1975] To whom do we speak? and will not God's
   kingdom come, if we ask it not. For of that kingdom do we speak which
   will be after the end of the world. For God hath a kingdom always;
   neither is He ever without a kingdom, whom the whole creation serveth.
   But what kingdom then dost thou wish for? That of which it is written
   in the Gospel, "Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom
   which is prepared for you from the beginning of the world." [1976] Lo
   here is the kingdom whereof we say, "Thy kingdom come." We pray that it
   may come in us; we pray that we may be found in it. For come it
   certainly will; but what will it profit thee, if it shall find thee at
   the left hand? Therefore, here again it is for thine own self that thou
   wishest well; for thyself thou prayest. This it is that thou dost long
   for; this desire in thy prayer, that thou mayest so live, that thou
   mayest have a part in the kingdom of God, which is to be given to all
   saints. Therefore when thou dost say, "Thy kingdom come," thou dost
   pray for thyself, that thou mayest live well. Let us have part in Thy
   kingdom: let that come even to us, which is to come to Thy saints and
   righteous ones.

   7. "Thy will be done." [1977] What! if thou say not this, will not God
   do His will? Remember what thou hast repeated in the Creed, "I believe
   in God the Father Almighty." If He be Almighty, why prayest thou that
   His will may be done? What is this then, "Thy will be done"? May it be
   done in me, that I may not resist Thy will. Therefore here again it is
   for thyself thou prayest, and not for God. For the will of God will be
   done in thee, though it be not done by thee. For both in them to whom
   He shall say, "Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom
   prepared for you from the beginning of the world;" [1978] shall the
   will of God be done, that the saints and righteous may receive the
   kingdom; and in them to whom He shall say, "Depart ye into everlasting
   fire, prepared for the devil and his angels," [1979] shall the will of
   God be done, that the wicked may be condemned to everlasting fire. That
   His will may be done by thee is another thing. It is not then without a
   cause, but that it may be well with thee, that thou dost pray that His
   will may be done in thee. But whether it be well or ill with thee, it
   will still be done in thee: but O that it may be done by thee also. Why
   do I say then, "Thy will be done in heaven and in earth," and do not
   say, "Thy will be done by heaven and earth?" Because what is done by
   thee, He Himself doeth in thee. Never is anything done by thee which He
   Himself doeth not in thee. Sometimes, indeed, He doeth in thee what is
   not done by thee; but never is anything done by thee, if He do it not
   in thee.

   8. But what is "in heaven and in earth," or, "as in heaven so in
   earth?" The Angels do Thy will; may we do it also. "Thy will be done as
   in heaven so in earth." The mind is heaven, the flesh is earth. When
   thou dost say (if so be thou do say it) with the Apostle, "With my mind
   I serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin;" [1980] the
   will of God is done in heaven, but not yet in earth. But when the flesh
   shall be in harmony with the mind, and "death shall be swallowed up in
   victory," [1981] so that no carnal desires shall remain for the mind to
   be in conflict with, when strife in the earth shall have passed away,
   the war of the heart be over, and that be gone by which is spoken, "the
   flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; for
   these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the
   things that ye would;" [1982] when this war, I say, shall be over, and
   all concupiscence shall have been changed into charity, nothing shall
   remain in the body to oppose the spirit, nothing to be tamed, nothing
   to be bridled, nothing to be trodden down; but the whole shall go on
   through concord unto righteousness, and the will of God will be done in
   heaven and in earth. "Thy will be done in heaven and in earth." We wish
   for perfection, when we pray for this. "Thy will be done as in heaven
   so in earth." In the Church the spiritual are heaven, the carnal are
   earth. So then, "Thy will be done as in heaven so in earth;" that as
   the spiritual do serve Thee, so the carnal being reformed may serve
   Thee also. "Thy will be done as in heaven so in earth." There is yet
   another very spiritual [1983] meaning of it. For we are admonished to
   pray for our enemies. The Church is heaven, the enemies of the Church
   are earth. What then is, "Thy will be done as in heaven so in earth"?
   May our enemies believe, as we also believe in Thee! may they become
   friends, and end their enmities! They are earth, therefore are they
   against us; may they become heaven, and they will be with us.

   9. "Give us this day our daily bread." [1984] Now here it is manifest,
   that it is for ourselves we pray. When thou sayest, "Hallowed be Thy
   Name," it requires explanation how it is that it is for thyself thou
   prayest, not for God. When thou sayest, "Thy will be done;" here again
   is there need of explanation, lest thou think that thou art wishing
   well to God in this prayer, that His will may be done, and not rather
   that thou art praying for thyself. When thou sayest, "Thy kingdom
   come;" this again must be explained, lest thou think that thou art
   wishing well to God in this prayer that He may reign. But from this
   place and onwards to the end of the Prayer, it is plain that we are
   praying to God for our own selves. When thou sayest, "Give us this day
   our daily bread," thou dost profess thyself to be God's beggar. But be
   not ashamed at this; how rich soever any man be on earth, he is still
   God's beggar. The beggar takes his stand before the rich man's house;
   but the rich man himself stands before the door of the great rich One.
   Petition is made to him, and he maketh his petition. If he were not in
   need, he would not knock at the ears of God in prayer. And what doth
   the rich man need? I am bold to say, the rich man needeth even daily
   bread. For how is it that he hath abundance of all things? whence but
   because God hath given it him? What should he have, if God withdrew His
   hand? Have not many laid down to sleep in wealth, and risen up in
   beggary? And that he doth not want, is due to God's mercy, not to his
   own power.

   10. But this bread, Dearly beloved, by which our body is filled, by
   which the flesh is recruited day by day; this bread, I say, God giveth
   not to those only who praise, but to those also who blaspheme Him; "Who
   maketh His sun to rise upon the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain
   upon the just and on the unjust." [1985] Thou praisest Him, and He
   feedeth thee; thou dost blaspheme Him, He feedeth thee. He waiteth for
   thee to repent; but if thou wilt not change thyself, He will condemn
   thee. Because then both good and bad receive this bread from God,
   thinkest thou there is no other bread for which the children ask, of
   which the Lord said in the Gospel, "It is not meet to take the
   children's bread, and to cast it to dogs?" [1986] Yes, surely there is.
   What then is that bread? and why is it called daily? Because this is
   necessary as the other; for without it we cannot live; without bread we
   cannot live. It is shamelessness to ask for wealth from God; it is no
   shamelessness to ask for daily bread. That which ministereth to pride
   is one thing, that which ministereth to life another. Nevertheless,
   because this bread which may be seen and handled, is given both to the
   good and bad; there is a daily bread, for which the children pray. That
   is the word of God, which is dealt out to us day by day. Our bread is
   daily bread; and by it live not our bodies, but our souls. It is
   necessary for us who are even now labourers in the vineyard,--it is our
   food, not our hire. For he that hires the labourer into the vineyard
   owes him two things; food, that he faint not, and his hire, wherewith
   he may rejoice. Our daily food then in this earth is the word of God,
   which is dealt out always in the Churches: our hire after labour is
   called eternal life. Again, if by this our daily bread thou understand
   what the faithful [1987] receive, what ye shall receive, when ye have
   been baptized, it is with good reason that we ask and say, "Give us
   this day our daily bread;" that we may live in such sort, as that we be
   not separated from the Holy Altar.

   11. "And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." [1988]
   Touching this petition again we need no explanation, that it is for
   ourselves that we pray. For we beg that our debts may be forgiven us.
   For debtors are we, not in money, but in sins. Thou art saying
   perchance at this moment, And you too. We answer, Yes, we too. What, ye
   Holy Bishops, are ye debtors? Yes, we are debtors too. What you! My
   Lord. [1989] Be it far from thee, do not thyself this wrong. I do
   myself no wrong, but I say the truth; we are debtors: "If we say we
   have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us." [1990]
   We have been baptized, and yet are we debtors. Not that anything then
   remained, which was not remitted to us in Baptism, but because in our
   lives we are contracting ever what needs daily forgiveness. They who
   are baptized, and forthwith depart out of this life, come up from the
   font [1991] without any debt; without any debt they leave the world.
   But they who are baptized and are still kept in this life, contract
   defilements by reason of their mortal frailty, by which though the ship
   be not sunk, yet have they need of recourse to the pump. For otherwise
   by little and little will that enter in by which the whole ship will be
   sunk. And to offer this prayer, is to have recourse to the pump. But we
   ought not only to pray, but to do alms also, because when the pump is
   used to prevent the ship from sinking, both the voices and hands are at
   work. Now we are at work with our voices, when we say, "Forgive us our
   debts, as we also forgive our debtors." And we are at work with our
   hands when we do this, "Break thy bread to the hungry, and bring the
   houseless poor into thine house. [1992] Shut up alms in the heart of a
   poor [1993] man, and it shall intercede for thee unto the Lord." [1994]

   12. Although therefore all our sins were forgiven in the "laver of
   regeneration," we should be driven into great straits, if there were
   not given to us the daily cleansing of the Holy Prayer. Alms and
   prayers purge away sins; only let not such sins be committed, for which
   we must necessarily be separated from our daily Bread; avoid we all
   such debts to which a severe and certain condemnation is due. Call not
   yourselves righteous, as though ye had no cause to say, "Forgive us our
   debts, as we also forgive our debtors." Though ye abstain from
   idolatry, from the consolations [1995] of astrologers, from the cures
   of enchanters, though ye abstain from the seductions of heretics, from
   the divisions of schismatics; though ye abstain from murders, from
   adulteries and fornications, from thefts and plunderings, from false
   witnessings, and all such other sins which I do not name, as have a
   ruinous consequence, for which it is necessary that the sinner be cut
   off from the altar, and be so bound in earth, as to be bound in heaven,
   to his great and deadly danger, unless again he be so loosed in earth,
   as to be loosed in heaven; yet after all these are excepted, still
   there is no want of occasions whereby a man may sin. A man sins in
   seeing with pleasure what he ought not to see. Yet who can hold in the
   quickness of the eye? For from this the eye is said to have received
   its very name, from its quickness. [1996] Who can restrain the ear or
   eye? The eyes may be shut when thou wilt, and are shut in a moment, but
   the ears thou canst only with an effort close: thou must raise the hand
   and reach them, and if any one hold thy hand, they are kept open, nor
   canst thou close them against reviling, impure, or flattering, and
   seducing words. And when thou hearest any things thou oughtest not to
   hear, though thou do it not, dost thou not sin with the ear? for thou
   hearest something that is bad with pleasure? How great sins doth the
   deadly tongue commit! Yea, sometimes sins of such a nature, that a man
   is separated from the altar for them. To the tongue pertains the whole
   matter of blasphemies, and many idle words again are spoken, which are
   not convenient. But let the hand do nothing wrong, let the feet run not
   to any evil, nor the eye be directed to immodesty; let not the ear be
   open with pleasure to filthy talk; nor the tongue move to indecent
   speech; yet tell me, who can restrain the thoughts? How often do we
   pray, my brethren, and our thoughts are elsewhere, as though we forgot
   before whom we are standing, or before whom we are prostrating
   ourselves! If all these things be collected together against us, will
   they not therefore not overwhelm us, because they are small faults?
   What matter is it whether lead or sand overwhelm us? The lead is all
   one mass, the sand is small grains, but by their great number they
   overwhelm thee. So thy sins are small. Seest thou not how the rivers
   are filled, and the lands are wasted by small drops? They are small,
   but they are many.

   13. Let us therefore say every day; and say it in sincerity of heart,
   and do what we say, "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our
   debtors." It is an engagement, a covenant, an agreement that we make
   with God. The Lord thy God saith to thee, Forgive, and I will forgive.
   Thou hast not forgiven; thou retainest thy sins against thyself, not I.
   I pray thee, my dearly beloved children, since I know what is expedient
   for you in the Lord's Prayer, and most of all in that sentence of it,
   "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors;" hear me. Ye are
   about to be baptized, forgive everything; whatsoever any man have in
   his heart against any other, let him from his heart forgive it. So
   enter in, and be sure, that all your sins which ye have contracted,
   whether from your birth of your parents after Adam with original sin,
   for which sins' sake ye run with babes to the Saviour's grace, or
   whatever after sins ye have contracted in your lives, by word, or deed,
   or thought, all are forgiven; and you will go out of the water as from
   before the presence of your Lord, with the sure discharge of all debts.

   14. Now because by reason of those daily sins of which I have spoken,
   it is necessary for you to say, in that [1997] daily prayer of
   cleansing as it were, "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our
   debtors;" what will ye do? Ye have enemies. For who can live on this
   earth without them? Take heed to yourselves, love them. In no way can
   thine enemy so hurt thee by his violence, as thou dost hurt thyself if
   thou love him not. For he may injure thy estate, or flocks, or house,
   or thy man-servant, or thy maid-servant, or thy son, or thy wife; or at
   most, if such power be given him, thy body. But can he injure thy soul,
   as thou canst thyself? Reach forward, dearly beloved, I beseech you, to
   this perfection. But have I given you this power? He only hath given it
   to whom ye say, "Thy will be done as in heaven so in earth. Yet let it
   not seem impossible to you. I know, I have known by experience, that
   there are Christian men who do love their enemies. If it seem to you
   impossible, ye will not do it. Believe then first that it can be done,
   and pray that the will of God may be done in you. For what good can thy
   neighbour's ill do thee? If he had no ill, he would not even be thine
   enemy. Wish him well then, that he may end his ill, and he will be
   thine enemy no longer. For it is not the human nature in him that is at
   enmity with thee, but his sin. Is he therefore thine enemy, because he
   hath a soul and body? In this he is as thou art: thou hast a soul, and
   so hath he: thou hast a body, and so hath he. He is of the same
   substance as thou art; ye were made both out of the same earth, and
   quickened by the same Lord. In all this he is as thou art. Acknowledge
   in him then thy brother. The first pair, Adam and Eve, were our
   parents; the one our father, the other our mother; and therefore we are
   brethren. But let us leave the consideration of our first origin. God
   is our Father, the Church our Mother, and therefore are we brethren.
   But you will say, my enemy is a heathen, a Jew, a heretic, of whom I
   spake some time ago on the words, "Thy will be done as in heaven so in
   earth." O Church, thy enemy is the heathen, the Jew, the heretic; he is
   the earth. If thou art heaven, call on thy Father which is in heaven,
   and pray for thine enemies: for so was Saul an enemy of the Church;
   thus was prayer made for him, and he became her friend. He not only
   ceased from being her persecutor, but he laboured to be her helper. And
   yet, to say the truth, prayer [1998] was made against him; but against
   his malice, not against his nature. So let thy prayer be against the
   malice of thine enemy, that it may die, and he may live. For if thine
   enemy were dead, thou hast lost it might seem an enemy, yet hast thou
   not found a friend. But if his malice die, thou hast at once lost an
   enemy and found a friend.

   15. But still ye are saying, Who can do, who has ever done this? May
   God bring it to effect in your hearts! I know as well as you, there are
   but few who do it; great men are they and spiritual who do so. Are all
   the faithful in the Church who approach the altar, and take the Body
   and Blood of Christ, are they all such? And yet they all say, "Forgive
   us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors." What, if God should
   answer them, "Why do ye ask me to do what I have promised, when ye do
   not what I have commanded?" What have I promised? "To forgive your
   debts." What have I commanded? "That ye also forgive your debtors." How
   can ye do this, if ye do not love your enemies? What then must we do,
   brethren? Is the flock of Christ reduced to such a scanty number? If
   they only ought to say, "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our
   debtors," who love their enemies; I know not what to do, I know not
   what to say. For must I say to you, If ye do not love your enemies, do
   not pray; I dare not say so; yea, pray rather that ye may love them.
   But must I say to you, If ye do not love your enemies, say not in the
   Lord's Prayer, "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors"?
   Suppose that I were to say, Do not use these words. If ye do not, your
   debts are not forgiven; and if ye do use them, and do not act
   thereafter, they are not forgiven. In order therefore that they may be
   forgiven, ye must both use the prayer, and do thereafter.

   16. I see some ground on which I may comfort not some few only, but the
   multitude of Christians: and I know that ye are longing to hear it.
   Christ hath said, "Forgive, that ye may be forgiven." [1999] And what
   do ye say in the Prayer which we have now been discussing? "Forgive us
   our debts, as we also forgive our debtors." So, Lord, forgive, as we
   forgive. This thou sayest, "O Father, which art in heaven, so forgive
   our debts, as we also forgive our debtors." For this ye ought to do,
   and if ye do it not, ye will perish. When your enemy asks pardon, at
   once forgive him. And is this much for you to do? Though it were much
   for thee to love thine enemy when violent against thee, is it much to
   love a man who is a supplicant before thee? What hast thou to say? He
   was before violent, and then thou hatedst him. I had rather thou hadst
   not hated him even then: I had rather then when thou wert suffering
   from his violence, thou hadst remembered the Lord, saying, "Father,
   forgive them, for they know not what they do." [2000] I would have then
   much wished that even at that time when thine enemy was violent against
   thee, thou hadst had regard to the Lord thy God speaking thus. But
   perhaps you will say, He did it, but then He did it as being the Lord,
   as the Christ, as the Son of God, as the Only-Begotten, as the Word
   made flesh. But what can I, an infirm and sinful man, do? If thy Lord
   be too high an example for thee, turn thy thoughts upon thy
   fellow-servant. The holy Stephen was being stoned, and as they stoned
   him, on bended knees did he pray for his enemies, and say, "Lord, lay
   not this sin to their charge." [2001] They were casting stones, not
   asking pardon, yet did he pray for them. I would thou wert like him;
   reach forth. Why art thou for ever trailing thy heart along the earth?
   Hear, "Lift up thy heart," reach forward, love thine enemies. If thou
   canst not love him in his violence, love him at least when he asks
   pardon. Love the man who saith to thee, "Brother, I have sinned,
   forgive me." If thou then forgive him not, I say not merely, that thou
   dost blot this prayer out of thine heart, but thou shall be blotted
   thyself out of the book of God.

   17. But if thou then at least forgive him, or let go hatred from thy
   heart, it is hatred from the heart I bid thee forego, and not proper
   discipline. What if one who asks my pardon, be one who ought to be
   chastised by me! Do what thou wilt, for I suppose that thou dost love
   thy child even when thou dost chastise him. Thou regardest not his
   cries under the rod, because thou art reserving for him his
   inheritance. This I say then, that thou forego from thy heart all
   hatred, when thine enemy asks pardon of thee. But perhaps you will say,
   "he is playing false, he is pretending." O thou judge of another's
   heart, tell me thine own father's thoughts, tell me thine own thoughts
   yesterday. He asks and petitions for pardon; forgive, by all means
   forgive him. If thou wilt not forgive him, it is thyself thou dost
   hurt, not him, for he knows what he has to do. Thou art not willing to
   forgive thine own fellow-servant; he will go then to thy Lord, and say
   to Him, "Lord, I have prayed my fellow-servant to forgive me, and he
   would not; do Thou forgive me." Hath not the Lord power to release his
   servant's debts? So he, having obtained pardon from his Lord, returns
   loosed, whilst thou remainest bound. How bound? The time of prayer will
   come, the time must come for thee to say, "Forgive us our debts, as we
   also forgive our debtors;" and the Lord will answer thee, Thou wicked
   servant, when thou didst owe Me so great a debt, thou didst ask Me, and
   I forgave thee; "shouldest not thou also have had compassion on thy
   fellow-servant, even as I had pity on thee?" [2002] These words are out
   of the Gospel, not of my own heart. But if on being asked, thou shall
   forgive him who begs for pardon, then thou canst say this prayer. And
   if thou hast not as yet the strength to love him in his violence, still
   thou mayest offer this prayer, "Forgive us our debts, as we also
   forgive our debtors." Let us pass on to the rest.

   18. "And lead us not into temptation. Forgive us our debts, as we also
   forgive our debtors," [2003] we say because of past sins, which we
   cannot undo, that they should not have been done. Thou canst labour not
   to do what thou hast done before, but how canst thou bring about, that
   that which thou hast done should not be done? As regards those things
   which have been done already, that sentence of the prayer is thy help,
   "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors." As regards
   those into which thou mayest fall, what wilt thou do? "Lead us not into
   temptation, but deliver us from evil." "Lead us not into temptation,
   but deliver us from evil," that is, from temptation itself.

   19. Now these three first petitions, "Hallowed be Thy Name, Thy kingdom
   come, Thy will be done as in heaven so in earth," these three regard
   the life eternal, for God's Name ought to be hallowed in us always, we
   ought to be in His kingdom always, we ought to do His will always. This
   will be to all eternity. But "daily bread" is necessary now. All the
   rest that we pray for from this article, regards the necessities of the
   present life. Daily bread is necessary in this life; the forgiveness of
   our debts is necessary in this life. For when we shall arrive at the
   other life, there will be an end of all debts. In this life there is
   temptation, in this life the sailing is dangerous, in this life
   something is ever stealing its way in through the chinks of our
   frailties, which must be pumped out. But when we shall be made equal to
   the Angels of God; no more need to say and pray to God to forgive us
   our debts, when there will be none. Here then is the "daily bread;"
   here the prayer that our "debts may be forgiven;" here that we "enter
   not into temptation;" for in that life temptation does not enter; here
   that we may be "delivered from evil;" for in that life there will be no
   evil, but eternal and abiding good.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1965] These were the last of the classes into which the catechumens
   were distributed, and were so called because they were now so far
   advanced as to "seek for baptism." See Serm. 216. 1 (Ad competentes,
   quid enim aliud sunt competentes, quam simul petentes) and Serm. 228. 1
   (Competentes dicebantur quoniam materna viscera, ut nascerentur,
   petendo pulsabant). Bingham, Antiqu. B. x. ch. ii. sects. 5-12. See
   Conf. B. ix. 6 (14).

   [1966] Joel ii. 32.

   [1967] Rom. x. 13, etc.

   [1968] Dæmonibus.

   [1969] Ps. cix. 7.

   [1970] 1 Tim. i. 13.

   [1971] Luke xxiii. 34.

   [1972] Gal. i. 22, etc.

   [1973] Matt. vi. 8.

   [1974] Exaudientis effectus.

   [1975] Matt. vi. 10.

   [1976] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [1977] Matt. vi. 10.

   [1978] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [1979] Matt. xxv. 41.

   [1980] Rom. vii. 25.

   [1981] 1 Cor. xv. 54.

   [1982] Gal. v. 17.

   [1983] Pius.

   [1984] Matt. vi. 11.

   [1985] Matt. v. 45.

   [1986] Matt. xv. 26.

   [1987] St. Augustin throughout these Sermons, as we see in other parts
   of his works, speaks with great reserve of the Holy Eucharist, as
   before those who were some of them unbaptized; fideles was the name of
   the baptized (Serm. 113. 2),--"fidelibus dico eis quibus Christo Corpus
   erogamus dico;" and in this sense it seems to be used in our Church
   Catechism: "The Body and Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed
   taken and received by the faithful in the Lord's Supper." This reserve
   of the ancient Church in itself implies the high doctrine of the Holy
   Eucharist; modern views have nothing to reserve.

   [1988] Matt. vi. 12.

   [1989] Domine.

   [1990] 1 John i. 8.

   [1991] Ascendunt.

   [1992] Isa. lviii. 7.

   [1993] The LXX. is, sunkleison eleemosunen en tois tameiois sou, kai
   haute exeleitai se ek pases kakoseos.

   [1994] Ecclus. xxix. 12, Vulgate.

   [1995] Constellationibus. (Bened.) Meliores notæ MSS. a consolationibus
   mathematicorum.

   [1996] Oculus a velocitate.

   [1997] Velut quotidiana mundatione istâ.

   [1998] Vide Sermon xl. (xc. Bened.) 9.

   [1999] Luke vi. 37.

   [2000] Luke xxiii. 34.

   [2001] Acts vii. 60.

   [2002] Matt. xviii. 32, 33.

   [2003] Matt. vi. 13.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon VII.

   [LVII. Ben.]

   Again, on Matt. vi. on the Lord's Prayer. To the Competentes.

   1. The order established for your edification requires that ye learn
   first what to believe, and afterwards what to ask. For so saith the
   Apostle, "Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be
   saved." [2004] This testimony blessed Paul cited out of the Prophet;
   for by the Prophet were those times foretold, when all men should call
   upon God; "Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be
   saved." And he added, "How then shall they call on Him in whom they
   have not believed? And how shall they believe in Him of whom they have
   not heard? Or how shall they hear without a preacher? Or how shall they
   preach except they be sent?" [2005] Therefore were preachers sent. They
   preached Christ. As they preached, the people heard, by hearing they
   believed, and by believing called upon Him. Because then it was most
   rightly and most truly said, "How shall they call on Him in whom they
   have not believed?" therefore have ye first learned what to believe:
   and to-day have learnt to call on Him in whom ye have believed.

   2. The Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, hath taught us a Prayer; and
   though He be the Lord Himself, as ye have heard and repeated in the
   Creed, the Only Son of God, yet He would not be alone. He is the Only
   Son, and yet would not be alone; He hath vouchsafed to have brethren.
   For to whom doth He say, "Say, Our Father, which art in heaven?" [2006]
   Whom did He wish us to call our Father, save His own Father? Did He
   grudge us this? Parents sometimes when they have gotten one, or two, or
   three children, fear to give birth to any more, lest they reduce the
   rest to beggary. But because the inheritance which He promiseth us is
   such as many may possess, and no one be straitened; therefore hath He
   called into His brotherhood the peoples of the nations; and the Only
   Son hath numberless brethren; who say, "Our Father, which art in
   heaven." So said they who have been before us; and so shall say those
   who will come after us. See how many brethren the Only Son hath in His
   grace, sharing His inheritance with those for whom He suffered death.
   We had a father and mother on earth, that we might be born to labours
   and to death: but we have found other parents, God our Father, and the
   Church our Mother, by whom we are born unto life eternal. Let us then
   consider, beloved, whose children we have begun to be; and let us live
   so as becomes those who have such a Father. See, how that our Creator
   hath condescended to be our Father!

   3. We have heard whom we ought to call upon, and with what hope of an
   eternal inheritance we have begun to have a Father in heaven; let us
   now hear what we must ask of Him. Of such a Father what shall we ask?
   Do we not ask rain of Him, to-day, and yesterday, and the day before?
   This is no great thing to have asked of such a Father, and yet ye see
   with what sighings, and with what great desire we ask for rain, when
   death is feared, when that is feared which none can escape. For sooner
   or later every man must die, and we groan, and pray, and travail in
   pain, and cry to God, that we may die a little later. How much more
   ought we to cry to Him, that we may come to that place where we shall
   never die!

   4. Therefore is it said, "Hallowed be Thy Name." This we also ask of
   Him that his Name may be hallowed in us; for Holy is it always. And how
   is His Name hallowed in us, except while it makes us holy. For once we
   were not holy, and we are made holy by His Name; but He is always Holy,
   and His Name always Holy. It is for ourselves, not for God, that we
   pray. For we do not wish well to God, to whom no ill can ever happen.
   But we wish what is good for ourselves, that His Holy Name may be
   hallowed, that that which is always Holy, may be hallowed in us.

   5. "Thy kingdom come." [2007] Come it surely will, whether we ask or
   no. Indeed, God hath an eternal kingdom. For when did He not reign?
   When did He begin to reign? For His kingdom hath no beginning, neither
   shall it have any end. But that we may know that in this prayer also we
   pray for ourselves, and not for God (for we do not say, "Thy kingdom
   come," as though we were asking that God may reign); we shall be
   ourselves His kingdom, if believing in Him we make progress in this
   faith. All the faithful, redeemed by the Blood of His Only Son, will be
   His kingdom. And this His kingdom will come, when the resurrection of
   the dead shall have taken place; for then He will come Himself. And
   when the dead are risen, He will divide them, as He Himself saith, "and
   He shall set some on the right hand, and some on the left." [2008] To
   those who shall be on the right hand He will say, "Come, ye blessed of
   My Father, receive the kingdom." This is what we wish and pray for when
   we say, "Thy kingdom come;" that it may come to us. For if we shall be
   reprobates, that kingdom will come to others, but not to us. But if we
   shall be of that number, who belong to the members of His Only-begotten
   Son, His kingdom will come to us, and will not tarry. For are there as
   many ages yet remaining, as have already passed away? The Apostle John
   hath said, "My little children, it is the last hour." [2009] But it is
   a long hour proportioned to this long day; and see how many years this
   last hour lasteth. But nevertheless, be ye as those who watch, and so
   sleep, and rise again, and reign. Let us watch now, let us sleep in
   death; at the end we shall rise again, and shall reign without end.

   6. "Thy will be done as in heaven, so in earth." [2010] The third thing
   we pray for is, that His will may be done as in heaven so in earth. And
   in this too we wish well for ourselves. For the will of God must
   necessarily be done. It is the will of God that the good should reign,
   and the wicked be damned. Is it possible that this will should not be
   done? But what good do we wish for ourselves, when we say, "Thy will be
   done as in heaven, so in earth"? Give ear. For this petition may be
   understood in many ways, and many things are to be in our thoughts in
   this petition, when we pray God, "Thy will be done as in heaven, so in
   earth." As Thy Angels offend Thee not, so may we also not offend Thee.
   Again, how is "Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth,"
   understood? All the holy Patriarchs, all the Prophets, all the
   Apostles, all the spiritual are as it were God's heaven; and we in
   comparison of them are earth. "Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in
   earth;" as in them, so in us also. Again, "Thy will be done, as in
   heaven, so in earth;" the Church of God is heaven, His enemies are
   earth. So we wish well for our enemies, that they too may believe and
   become Christians, and so the will of God be done, as in heaven, so
   also in earth. Again, "Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth."
   Our spirit is heaven, and the flesh earth. As our spirit is renewed by
   believing, so may our flesh be renewed by rising again; and "the will
   of God be done, as in heaven, so in earth." Again, our mind whereby we
   see truth, and delight in this truth, is heaven; as, "I delight in the
   law of God, after the inward man." What is the earth? "I see another
   law in my members, warring against the law of my mind?" [2011] When
   this strife shall have passed away, and a full concord brought about of
   the flesh and spirit, the will of God will be done as in heaven, so
   also in earth. When we repeat this petition, let us think of all these
   things, and ask them all of the Father. Now all these things which we
   have mentioned, these three petitions, beloved, have respect to the
   life eternal. For if the Name of our God is sanctified in us, it will
   be for eternity. If His kingdom come, where we shall live for ever, it
   will be for eternity. If His will be done as in heaven, so in earth, in
   all the ways which I have explained, it will be for eternity.

   7. There remain now the petitions for this life of our pilgrimage;
   therefore follows, "Give us this day our daily bread." [2012] Give us
   eternal things, give us things temporal. Thou hast promised a kingdom,
   deny us not the means of subsistence. Thou wilt give everlasting glory
   with Thyself hereafter, give us in this earth temporal support.
   Therefore is it "day by day," and "to-day," that is, in this present
   time. For when this life shall have passed away, shall we ask for daily
   bread then? For then it will not be called, "day by day," but "to-day."
   Now it is called, "day by day," when one day passes away, and another
   day succeeds. Will it be called "day by day," when there will be one
   eternal day? This petition for daily bread is doubtless to be
   understood in two ways, both for the necessary supply of our bodily
   food, and for the necessities of our spiritual support. There is a
   necessary supply of bodily food, for the preservation of our daily
   life, without which we cannot live. This is food and clothing, but the
   whole is understood in a part. When we ask for bread, we thereby
   understand all things. There is a spiritual [2013] food also which the
   faithful know, which ye too will know, when ye shall receive it at the
   altar of God. This also is "daily Bread," necessary only for this life.
   For shall we receive the Eucharist when we shall have come to Christ
   Himself, and begun to reign with Him for ever? So then the Eucharist is
   our daily bread; but let us in such wise receive it, that we be not
   refreshed in our bodies only, but in our souls. For the virtue which is
   apprehended there, is unity, that gathered together into His body, and
   made His members, we may be what we receive. Then will it be indeed our
   daily bread. Again, what I am handling before you now is "daily bread;"
   and the daily lessons which ye hear in church, are daily bread, and the
   hymns ye hear and repeat are daily bread. For all these are necessary
   in our state of pilgrimage. But when we shall have got to heaven, shall
   we hear the word, [2014] we who shall see the Word Himself, and hear
   the Word Himself, and eat and drink Him as the angels do now? Do the
   angels need books, and interpreters, and readers? Surely not. They read
   in seeing, for the Truth Itself they see, and are abundantly satisfied
   from that fountain, from which we obtain some few [2015] drops.
   Therefore has it been said touching our daily bread, that this petition
   is necessary for us in this life.

   8. "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." [2016] Is this
   necessary except in this life? For in the other we shall have no debts.
   For what are debts, but sins? See, ye are on the point of being
   baptized, then all your sins will be blotted out, none whatever will
   remain. Whatever evil ye have ever done, in deed, or word, or desire,
   or thought, all will be blotted out. And yet if in the life which is
   after Baptism there were security from sin, we should not learn such a
   prayer as this, "Forgive us our debts." Only let us by all means do
   what comes next, "As we forgive our debtors." Do ye then who are about
   to enter in to receive a plenary and entire remission of your debts, do
   ye above all things see that ye have nothing in your hearts against any
   other, so as to come forth from Baptism secure, as it were free and
   discharged of all debts, and then begin to purpose to avenge yourselves
   on your enemies, who in time past have done you wrong. Forgive, as ye
   are forgiven. God can do no one wrong, and yet He forgiveth who oweth
   nothing. How then ought he to forgive, who is himself forgiven, when He
   forgiveth all, who oweth nothing that can be forgiven Him?

   9. "Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil." [2017] Will
   this again be necessary in the life to come? "Lead us not into
   temptation," will not be said, except where there can be temptation. We
   read in the book of holy Job, "Is not the life of man upon earth a
   temptation?" [2018] What then do we pray for? Hear what. The Apostle
   James saith, "Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God."
   [2019] He spoke of those evil temptations, whereby men are deceived,
   and brought under the yoke of the devil. This is the kind of temptation
   he spoke of. For there is another sort of temptation which is called a
   proving; of this kind of temptation it is written, "The Lord your God
   tempteth (proveth) you to know whether ye love Him." [2020] What means
   "to know"? "To make you know," for He knoweth already. With that kind
   of temptation, whereby we are deceived and seduced, God tempteth no
   man. But undoubtedly in His deep and hidden judgment He abandons some.
   And when He hath abandoned them, the tempter finds his opportunity. For
   he finds in him no resistance against his power, but forthwith presents
   himself to him as his possessor, if God abandon him. Therefore that He
   may not abandon us, do we say, "Lead us not into temptation." "For
   every one is tempted," says the same Apostle James, "when he is drawn
   away of his own lust and enticed. Then lust, when it hath conceived,
   bringeth forth sin; and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth
   death." [2021] What then has he hereby taught us? To fight against our
   lusts. For ye are about to put away your sins in Holy Baptism; but
   lusts will still remain, wherewith ye must fight after that ye are
   regenerate. For a conflict with your own selves still remains. Let no
   enemy from without be feared: conquer thine own self, and the whole
   world is conquered. What can any tempter from without, whether the
   devil or the devil's minister, do against thee? Whosoever sets the hope
   of gain before thee to seduce thee, let him only find no covetousness
   in thee; and what can he who would tempt thee by gain effect? Whereas
   if covetousness be found in thee, thou takest fire at the sight of
   gain, and art taken by the bait of this corrupt food. [2022] But if he
   find no covetousness in thee, the trap remains spread in vain. Or
   should the tempter set before thee some woman of surpassing beauty; if
   chastity be within, iniquity from without is overcome. Therefore that
   he may not take thee with the bait of a strange woman's beauty, fight
   with thine own lust within; thou hast no sensible perception of thine
   enemy, but of thine own concupiscence thou hast. Thou dost not see the
   devil, but the object that engageth thee thou dost see. Get the mastery
   then over that of which thou art sensible within. Fight valiantly, for
   He who hath regenerated thee is thy Judge; He hath arranged the lists,
   He is making ready the crown. But because thou wilt without doubt be
   conquered, if thou have not Him to aid thee, if He abandon thee:
   therefore dost thou say in the prayer, "Lead us not into temptation."
   The Judge's wrath hath given over some to their own lusts; and the
   Apostle says, "God gave them over to the lusts of their hearts." [2023]
   How did He give them up? Not by forcing, but by forsaking them.

   10. "Deliver us from evil," may belong to the same sentence. Therefore,
   that thou mayest understand it to be all one sentence, it runs thus,
   "Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil." Therefore he
   added "but," to show that all this belongs to one sentence, "Lead us
   not into temptation, but deliver us from evil." How is this? I will
   propose them singly. "Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
   evil." By delivering us from evil, He leadeth us not into temptation;
   by not leading us into temptation, He delivereth us from evil.

   11. And truly it is a great temptation, dearly beloved, it is a great
   temptation in this life, when that in us is the subject of temptation,
   whereby we attain [2024] pardon, if in any of our temptations we have
   fallen. It is a frightful temptation, when that is taken from us,
   whereby we may be healed from the wounds of other temptations. I know
   that ye have not yet understood me. Give me your attention, that ye may
   understand. Suppose avarice tempts a man, and he is conquered in any
   single temptation (for sometimes even a good wrestler and fighter may
   get roughly handled [2025] ): avarice then has got the better of a man,
   good wrestler though he be, and he has done some avaricious act. Or
   there has been a passing lust; it has not brought the man to
   fornication, nor reached unto adultery, for when this does take place,
   the man must at all events be kept back from the criminal act. But he
   "hath seen a woman to lust after her;" [2026] he has let his thoughts
   dwell on her with more pleasure than was right; he has admitted the
   attack; excellent combatant though he be, he has been wounded, but he
   has not consented to it; he has beaten back the motion of his lust, has
   chastised it with the bitterness of grief, he has beaten it back; and
   has prevailed. Still in the very fact that he had slipped, has he
   ground for saying, "Forgive us our debts." And so of all other
   temptations, it is a hard matter that in them all there should not be
   occasion for saying, "Forgive us our debts." What then is that
   frightful temptation which I have mentioned, that grievous, that
   tremendous temptation, which must be avoided with all our strength,
   with all our resolution; what is it? When we go about to avenge
   ourselves. Anger is kindled, and the man burns to be avenged. O
   frightful temptation! Thou art losing that, whereby thou hadst to
   attain pardon for other faults. If thou hadst committed any sin as to
   other senses, and other lusts, hence mightest thou have had thy cure,
   in that thou mightest say, "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive
   our debtors." But whoso instigateth thee to take vengeance, will lose
   for thee the power thou hadst to say, "As we also forgive our debtors."
   When that power is lost, all sins will be retained; nothing at all is
   remitted.

   12. Our Lord and Master, and Saviour, knowing this dangerous temptation
   in this life, when He taught us six or seven petitions in this Prayer,
   took none of them for Himself to treat of, and to commend to us with
   greater earnestness, than this one. Have we not said, "Our Father,
   which art in heaven;" and the rest which follows? Why after the
   conclusion of the Prayer, did He not enlarge upon it to us, either as
   to what He had laid down in the beginning, or concluded with at the
   end, or placed in the middle? For why said He not, if the Name of God
   be not hallowed in you, or if ye have no part in the kingdom of God, or
   if the will of God be not done in you, as in heaven, or if God guard
   you not, that ye enter not into temptation; why none of all these? but
   what saith He? "Verily I say unto you, that if ye forgive men their
   trespasses;" [2027] in reference to that petition, "Forgive us our
   debts, as we also forgive our debtors." Having passed over all the
   other petitions which He taught us, this He taught us with an especial
   force. There was no need of insisting [2028] so much upon those sins in
   which if a man offend, he may know the means whereby he may be cured:
   need of it there was, with regard to that sin in which if thou sin,
   there is no means whereby the rest can be cured. For this thou oughtest
   to be ever saying, "Forgive us our debts." What debts? There is no lack
   of them; for we are but men; I have talked somewhat more than I ought,
   have said something I ought not, have laughed more than I ought, have
   eaten more than I ought, have listened with pleasure to what I ought
   not, have drunk more than I ought, have seen with pleasure what I ought
   not, have thought with pleasure on what I ought not; "Forgive us our
   debts, as we also forgive our debtors." This if thou hast lost, thou
   art lost thyself.

   13. Take heed, my brethren, my sons, sons of God, take heed, I beseech
   you, in that I am saying to you. Fight to the uttermost of your powers
   with your own hearts. And if ye shall see your anger making a stand
   against you, pray to God against it, that God may make thee conqueror
   of thyself, that God may make thee conqueror, I say, not of thine enemy
   without, but of thine own soul within. For He will give thee His
   present help, and will do it. He would rather that we ask this of Him,
   than rain. For ye see, beloved, how many petitions the Lord Christ hath
   taught us; and there is scarce found among them one which speaks of
   daily bread, that all our thoughts may be moulded after the life to
   come? For what can we fear that He will not give us, who hath promised
   and said, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and
   all these things shall be added unto you; for your Father knoweth that
   ye have need of these things before ye ask Him. Seek ye first the
   kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be
   added unto you." [2029] For many have been tried even with hunger, and
   have been found gold, and have not been forsaken by God. They would
   have perished with hunger, if the daily inward bread were to leave
   their heart. After this let us chiefly hunger. For, "Blessed are they
   who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled."
   [2030] But He can in mercy look upon our infirmity, and see us, as it
   is said, "Remember that we are dust." [2031] He who from the dust made
   and quickened man, for that His work of clay's sake, gave His Only Son
   to death. Who can explain, who can worthily so much as conceive, how
   much He loveth us?
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2004] Joel ii. 32; Rom. x. 13.

   [2005] Rom. x. 14, 15.

   [2006] Matt. vi. 9.

   [2007] Matt. vi. 10.

   [2008] Matt. xxv. 33.

   [2009] 1 John ii. 18, Vulgate.

   [2010] Matt. vi. 10.

   [2011] Rom. vii. 22, 23.

   [2012] Matt. vi. 11.

   [2013] See Sermon vi. (lvi. Bened.) 10 and note.

   [2014] Codex.

   [2015] Irroramur.

   [2016] Matt. vi. 12.

   [2017] Matt. vi. 13.

   [2018] Job vii. 1, Sept.; peiraterion.

   [2019] Jas. i. 13.

   [2020] Deut. xiii. 3.

   [2021] Jas. i. 14, 15.

   [2022] Vitiosæ escæ laqueo.

   [2023] Rom. i. 24, Vulgate.

   [2024] Meremur.

   [2025] Vulneratur.

   [2026] Matt. v. 28.

   [2027] Matt. vi. 14.

   [2028] Commendanda.

   [2029] Matt. vi. 53.

   [2030] Matt. v. 6.

   [2031] Ps. cii. 14, Sept. (ciii. English version).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon VIII.

   [LVIII. Ben.]

   Again on the Lord's Prayer, Matt. vi. To the Competentes.

   1. You have just repeated the Creed, where in brief summary is
   contained the Faith. I have already before now told you what the
   Apostle Paul says, "How shall they call on Him in whom they have not
   believed?" [2032] Because then you have both heard, and learnt, and
   repeated how you must believe in God; hear to-day how He must be called
   upon. The Son Himself, as you heard when the Gospel was read, taught
   His disciples and His faithful ones this Prayer. Good hope have we of
   obtaining our cause, when such an Advocate [2033] hath dictated our
   suit. The Assessor of the Father, as you have confessed, who sitteth on
   the right hand of the Father; He is our Advocate who is to be our
   Judge. For from thence will He come to judge the quick and dead. Learn
   then, this Prayer also which you will have to repeat in eight days
   time. But whosoever of you have not repeated the Creed well, have yet
   time enough, let them learn it; because on the Sabbath day [2034] in
   the hearing of all who shall be present, you will have to repeat it: on
   the last [2035] Sabbath day, when you will be here to be baptized. But
   in eight days from to-day will you have to repeat this Prayer, which
   you have heard to-day.

   2. Of which the first clause is, "Our Father, which art in heaven."
   [2036] We have found then a Father in heaven; let us take good heed how
   we live on earth. For he who hath found such a Father, ought so to live
   that he may be worthy to come to his inheritance. But we say all in
   common, "Our Father." How great a condescension! This the emperor says,
   and this says the beggar: this says the slave, and this his lord. They
   say all together, "Our Father, which art in heaven." Therefore do they
   understand that they are brethren, seeing they have one Father. Now let
   not the lord disdain to have his slave for a brother, seeing the Lord
   Christ has vouch-safed to have him for a brother.

   3. "Hallowed be Thy Name, Thy kingdom come." [2037] This hallowing of
   God's Name is that whereby we are made holy. For His Name is always
   Holy. We wish also for His kingdom to come; come it will, though we
   wish it not; but to wish and pray that His kingdom may come, is nothing
   else than to wish of Him, that He would make us worthy of His kingdom,
   lest haply, which God forbid, it should come, and not come to us. For
   to many that will never come, which nevertheless must come. For to them
   will it come, to whom it shall be said, "Come, ye blessed of My Father,
   receive the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world."
   [2038] But it will not come to them to whom it shall be said, "Depart
   from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire." [2039] Therefore when we
   say, "Thy kingdom come," we pray that it may come to us. What is, "may
   come to us"? May find us good. This we pray for then, that He would
   make us good; for then to us will His kingdom come.

   4. We go on, "Thy will be done as in heaven so in earth." [2040] The
   Angels serve Thee in heaven, may we serve Thee in earth! The Angels do
   not offend Thee in heaven, may we not offend Thee in earth! As they do
   Thy will, so may we do it also! And here what do we pray for, but that
   we may be good? For when we do God's will (for He without doubt doeth
   His own will), then is His will done in us. And we may understand in
   another and a right sense these words, "Thy will be done as in heaven,
   so in earth." We receive the commandment of God, and it is
   well-pleasing to us, well-pleasing to our mind. "For we delight in the
   law of God after the inward man." [2041] Then is His will done in
   heaven. For our spirit is compared to heaven, but to the earth our
   flesh. What then is "Thy will be done as in heaven, so in earth"? That
   as Thy command is well-pleasing to our mind, so may our flesh consent
   thereto; and so that strife be ended which is described by the Apostle,
   "for the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
   flesh." [2042] When the Spirit lusteth against the flesh, His will is
   even now done in heaven; when the flesh lusteth not against the Spirit,
   His will is now done in earth. There will be harmony complete when He
   will; be then the contest now, that there may be victory hereafter.
   Thus again, "Thy will be done as in heaven, so in earth," may be well
   understood, by making "heaven" to be the Church, because it is the
   throne [2043] of God; and "earth" the unbelievers, to whom it is said,
   "Earth thou art, and unto earth shalt thou go." [2044] When therefore
   we pray for our enemies, for the enemies of the Church, the enemies of
   the Christian name, we pray that His will may be done "as in heaven, so
   in earth," that is, as in Thy faithful ones, so in Thy blasphemers
   also, that they all may become "heaven."

   5. There follows next, "Give us this day our daily bread." [2045] It
   may be understood simply that we pour forth this prayer for daily
   sustenance, that we may have abundance: or if not that, that we may
   have no want. Now he said "daily," for as long as it is called
   "to-day." [2046] Daily we live, and daily rise, and are daily fed, and
   daily hunger. May He then give us daily bread. Why did He not say
   "covering" too, for the support of our life is in meat and drink, our
   covering in raiment and lodging. Man should desire nothing more than
   these. Forasmuch as the Apostle saith, "We brought nothing into this
   world, neither can we carry anything out: having food and covering,
   [2047] let us be therewith content." [2048] Perish covetousness, and
   nature is rich. Therefore if this prayer have reference to our daily
   sustenance, since this is a good understanding of the words, "Give us
   this day our daily bread;" let us not marvel, if under the name of
   bread other necessary things are also understood. As when Joseph
   invited his brethren, "These men," saith he, "will eat bread with me
   to-day." [2049] Why, were they to eat bread only? No, but in the
   mention of bread only, all the rest was understood. So when we pray for
   daily bread, we ask for whatever is necessary for us in earth for our
   bodies' sake. But what saith the Lord Jesus? "Seek ye first the kingdom
   of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
   you." [2050] Again, this is a very good sense of, "Give us this day our
   daily bread," thy Eucharist, our daily food. For the faithful know what
   they receive, and good for them it is to receive that daily bread which
   is necessary for this time present. They pray then for themselves, that
   they may become good, that they may persevere in goodness, and faith,
   and a holy life. This do they wish, this they pray for; for if they
   persevere not in this good life, they will be separated from that
   Bread. Therefore, "Give us this day our daily bread." What is this? Let
   us live so, that we be not separated from Thy altar. Again, the Word of
   God which is laid open to us, and in a manner broken day by day, is
   "daily bread." And as our bodies hunger after that other, so do our
   souls after this bread. And so we both ask for this bread simply, and
   whatsoever is in this life needful both for our souls and bodies, is
   included in "daily bread."

   6. "Forgive us our debts," [2051] we say, and we may well say so; for
   we say the truth. For who is he that lives here in the flesh, and hath
   no debts? What man is there that lives so, that this prayer is not
   necessary for him? He may puff himself up, justify himself he cannot.
   It were well for him to imitate the Publican, and not swell as the
   Pharisee, "who went up into the temple," [2052] and boasted of his
   deserts, and covered up his wounds. Whereas he who said, "Lord, be
   merciful to me a sinner," [2053] knew wherefore he went up. This prayer
   the Lord Jesus, consider, my brethren, this prayer the Lord Jesus
   taught His disciples to offer, those great first Apostles of His, the
   leaders of our flock. [2054] If the leaders of the flock then pray for
   the remission of their sins, what ought the lambs to do, of whom it is
   said, "Bring young rams unto the Lord"? [2055] You knew then that you
   have repeated this in the Creed, because amongst the rest you have
   mentioned there "the remission of sins." There is one remission of sins
   which is given once for all; another which is given day by day. There
   is one remission of sins which is given once for all in Holy Baptism;
   another which is given as long as we live here in the Lord's Prayer.
   Wherefore we say, "Forgive us our debts."

   7. And God has brought us into a covenant, and agreement, and a firm
   bond [2056] with Him, in that we say, "as we also forgive our debtors."
   He who would say it effectually, "Forgive us our debts," must say
   truly, "as we also forgive our debtors." [2057] If this which is last
   he either say not, or say deceitfully, the other which is first he says
   in vain. We say to you then especially who are approaching to Holy
   Baptism, from your hearts forgive everything. And ye faithful, who
   taking advantage of this occasion are listening to this prayer, and our
   exposition of it, do ye wholly and from your hearts forgive whatsoever
   ye have against any. Forgive it there where God seeth. For sometimes a
   man remitteth with the mouth, and in the heart retaineth; he remitteth
   with the mouth for men's sake, and retaineth in the heart, as not
   fearing the eyes of God. But do ye remit entirely. Whatever ye have
   retained up to these holy days, [2058] in these holy days at least
   remit. "The sun ought not to go down upon your wrath," [2059] yet many
   suns have passed. Let then your wrath at length pass away also, now
   that we are celebrating the days of the great Sun, of that Sun of which
   Scripture saith, "Unto you shall the Sun of righteousness arise with
   healing in His wings." [2060] What is, "in His wings"? In His
   protection. Whence it is said in the Psalms, "Keep me under the shadow
   of Thy wings." [2061] But as to others who in the day of judgment shall
   repent, but all too late, and who shall mourn, yet unavailingly, it
   hath been foretold by Wisdom what they shall then say as they repent
   and groan for anguish of spirit, "What hath pride profited us, or what
   good hath riches with our vaunting brought us? All these things are
   passed away like a shadow." And, "Therefore have we erred from the way
   of truth, and the light of righteousness hath not shined unto us, and
   the Sun of righteousness rose not upon us." [2062] That Sun riseth upon
   the righteous only; but this sun which we see, God "maketh," daily "to
   rise upon the good and evil." [2063] The righteous attain to the seeing
   of that Sun; and that Sun dwelleth now in our hearts by faith. If then
   thou art angry, let not this sun go down in thine heart upon thy wrath;
   "Let not the sun go down upon thy wrath;" lest haply thou be angry, and
   so the Sun of righteousness go down upon thee, and thou abide in
   darkness.

   8. Now do not think that anger is nothing. "Mine eye was disordered
   because of anger," [2064] saith the Prophet. Surely he whose eye is
   disordered cannot see the sun; and if he should try to see it, it were
   pain, and no pleasure to him. And what is anger? The lust of vengeance.
   A man lusteth to be avenged, and Christ is not yet avenged, the holy
   martyrs are not yet avenged. Still doth the patience of God wait, that
   the enemies of Christ, the enemies of the martyrs, may be converted.
   And who are we, that we should seek for vengeance? If God should seek
   it at our hands, where should we abide? He who hath never in any matter
   done us harm, doth not wish to avenge Himself of us; and do we seek to
   be avenged, who are almost daily offending God? Forgive therefore; from
   the heart forgive. If thou art angry, yet sin not. "Be ye angry, and
   sin not." [2065] Be ye angry as being but men, if so be ye are overcome
   by it; yet sin not, so as to retain anger in your heart (for if ye do
   retain it, ye retain it against yourselves), lest ye enter not into
   that Light. Therefore forgive. What then is anger? The lust of
   vengeance. And what is hatred? Inveterate anger. If anger become
   inveterate, it is then called hatred. And this he seems to acknowledge,
   who when he had said, "Mine eye is disordered because of anger;" added,
   "I have become inveterate among all mine enemies." [2066] What was
   anger when it was new, became hatred when it was turned into long
   continuance. [2067] Anger is a "mote," hatred, a "beam." We sometimes
   find fault with one who is angry, yet we retain hatred in our own
   hearts; and so Christ saith to us, "Thou seest the mote in thy
   brother's eye, and seest not the beam in thine own eye." [2068] How
   grew the mote into a beam? Because it was not at once plucked out.
   Because thou didst suffer the sun to rise and go down so often upon thy
   wrath, and madest it inveterate, because thou contractedst evil
   suspicions, and wateredst the mote, and by watering hast nourished it,
   and by nourishing it, hast made it a beam. Tremble then at least when
   it is said, "Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer." [2069] Thou
   hast not drawn the sword, nor inflicted any bodily wound, nor by any
   blow killed another; the thought only of hatred is in thy heart, and
   hereby art thou held to be a murderer, guilty art thou before the eyes
   of God. The other man is alive, and yet thou hast killed him. As far as
   thou art concerned, thou hast killed the man whom thou hatest. Reform
   then, and amend thyself. If scorpions or adders were in your houses,
   how would ye toil to purify them, that ye might be able to dwell in
   safety? Yet are ye angry, yea inveterate anger is in your hearts, and
   there grow so many hatreds, so many beams, so many scorpions, so many
   vipers, and will ye not then purify the house of God, your heart? Do
   then what is said, "As we also forgive our debtors;" and so say
   securely, "Forgive us our debts." For without debts in this earth ye
   cannot live; but those great crimes which it is your blessing to have
   been forgiven in Baptism, and from which we ought to be ever free, are
   of one sort, and of another are those daily sins, without which a man
   cannot live in this world, by reason of which this daily prayer with
   its covenant and agreement is necessary; that as we say with all
   cheerfulness, "Forgive us our debts;" so we may say with all truth, "As
   we also forgive our debtors." So much then have we said as touching
   past sins; what now for the future?

   9. "Lead us not into temptation:" [2070] forgive what we have done
   already, and grant that we may not commit any more sins. For whosoever
   is overcome by temptation, committeth sin. Thus the Apostle James
   saith, "Let no man say when he is tempted, he is tempted of God, for
   God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth He any man. But every
   man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed.
   Then lust, when it hath conceived, bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it
   is finished, bringeth forth death." [2071] Therefore that thou be not
   drawn away by thy lust; consent not to it. It hath no means of
   conceiving, but by thee. Thou hast consented, hast as it were in thine
   heart admitted [2072] her embrace. Lust has risen up, deny thyself to
   her, follow her not. It is a lust unlawful, impure, and shameful, it
   will alienate thee from God. Give it not then the embrace of thy
   consent, lest thou have to bewail the birth; for if thou consent, that
   is, when thou hast embraced her, she conceives, "and when lust hath
   conceived, it bringeth forth sin." Dost thou not yet fear? "Sin
   bringeth forth death;" at least, fear death. If thou fear not sin, yet
   fear that whereunto it leads. Sin is sweet; but death is bitter. This
   is the infelicity of men; that for which they sin, they leave here when
   they die, and the sin themselves they carry with them. Thou dost sin
   for money, it must be left here: or for a country seat; it must be left
   here: or for some woman's sake; she must be left here; and whatsoever
   it be for which thou dost sin, when thou shalt have closed thine eyes
   in death, thou must leave it here; yet the sin itself which thou
   committest, thou carriest with thee.

   10. May sins then be forgiven; the past forgiven, and the future cease.
   But without them here below thou canst not live; be they either lesser
   sins, or small, or trivial. Yet let not even these small and trivial
   sins be despised. With little drops is the river filled. Let not even
   the lesser sins be despised. Through narrow chinks in the ship the
   water oozes in, [2073] the hold keeps filling, and if it be disregarded
   the ship is sunk. But the sailors are not idle; their hands are active,
   [2074] --active that the water may be drained off from day to day. So
   be thy hands active, that thou mayest pump from day to day. What is the
   meaning of "be thy hands active"? Let them give, do good works, so be
   thy hands engaged. "Break thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor
   and houseless into thine house; if thou seest the naked, clothe him."
   [2075] Do all thou canst, do it with the means thou canst command, do
   it cheerfully, and so put up thy prayer with confidence. It will have
   two wings, a double alms. What is "a double alms"? "Forgive, and ye
   shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall be given unto you." [2076] The
   one alms is that which is done from the heart, when thou forgivest thy
   brother his sin. The other alms is that which is done out of thy
   substance, when thou dealest bread to the poor. Offer both, lest
   without either wing thy prayer remain motionless.

   11. Therefore when we have said, "Lead us not into temptation," there
   follows, "But deliver us from evil." Now whoso wishes to be delivered
   from evil, bears witness that he is in evil. And thus saith the
   Apostle, "Redeeming the time, because the days are evil." [2077] But
   who is there "that wisheth for life, and loveth to see good days"?
   [2078] Seeing that all men in this flesh have only evil days; who doth
   not wish it? Do thou what follows, "Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
   lips that they speak no guile: depart from evil, and do good, seek
   peace, and ensue it;" [2079] and then thou hast got rid of evil days,
   and thy prayer, "deliver us from evil," is fulfilled.

   12. Therefore the three first petitions, "Hallowed be Thy Name, Thy
   kingdom come, Thy will be done as in heaven, so in earth," are for
   eternity. But the four following relate to this life, "Give us this day
   our daily bread." Shall we ask day by day for daily bread, when we
   shall have come to that fulness of blessing? "Forgive us our debts."
   Shall we say this in that kingdom, when we shall have no debts? "Lead
   us not into temptation." Shall we be able to say this then, when there
   will be no temptation? "Deliver us from evil." Shall we say this, when
   there shall be nothing from which to be delivered? Therefore these four
   are necessary, because of our daily life, but the three first in
   reference to the life eternal. But all things let us ask, with a view
   of attaining to that life, and let us pray here, that we be not
   separated from it. Every day must this prayer be said by you, when you
   are baptized. For the Lord's Prayer is said daily in the Church before
   the Altar of God, and the faithful hear it. We have no fear therefore
   as to your not learning it carefully, because even if any of you should
   be unable to get it perfectly, he will learn it by hearing it day by
   day.

   13. Therefore on the Saturday [2080] when by the grace of God you will
   keep the Vigil, you will have to repeat not the Prayer, but the Creed.
   For if you do not know the Creed now, you will not hear that every day
   in the Church, and among the people. But when you have learnt it, that
   you may not forget it, say it every day when you rise; when you are
   preparing for sleep, rehearse your Creed, to the Lord rehearse it,
   remind yourselves of it, and be not weary of repeating it. For
   repetition is useful, lest forgetfulness steal over you. Do not say, "I
   said it yesterday, I have said it today, I say it every day, I know it
   perfectly well." Call thy faith to mind, look into thyself, let thy
   Creed be as it were a mirror to thee. Therein see thyself, whether thou
   dost believe all which thou professest to believe, and so rejoice day
   by day in thy faith. Let it be thy wealth, let it be in a sort the
   daily clothing of thy soul. Dost thou not always dress thyself when
   thou risest? So by the daily repetition of thy Creed dress thy soul,
   lest haply forgetfulness make it bare, and thou remain naked, and that
   take place which the Apostle saith, (may it be far from thee!) "If so
   be that being unclothed, [2081] we shall not be found naked." [2082]
   For we shall be clothed by our faith: and this faith is at once a
   garment and a breastplate; a garment against shame, a breastplate
   against adversity. But when we shall have arrived at that place where
   we shall reign, no need will there be to say the Creed. We shall see
   God; God Himself will be our vision; the vision of God will be the
   reward of our present faith.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2032] Rom. x. 14.

   [2033] Jurisperitus.

   [2034] Easter Eve.

   [2035] i.e. in Lent.

   [2036] Matt. vi. 9.

   [2037] Matt. vi. 9, 10.

   [2038] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [2039] Matt. xxv. 41.

   [2040] Matt. vi. 10.

   [2041] Rom. vii. 22.

   [2042] Gal. v. 17.

   [2043] Portat.

   [2044] Gen. iii. 19, Sept.

   [2045] Matt. vi. 11.

   [2046] Heb. iii. 13.

   [2047] Tegumentum; skepasmata.

   [2048] 1 Tim. vi. 7, 8.

   [2049] Gen. xliii. 16, Sept.

   [2050] Matt. vi. 33.

   [2051] Matt. vi. 12.

   [2052] Luke xviii. 10, 11.

   [2053] Luke xviii. 13.

   [2054] Arietes nostros.

   [2055] Ps. xxviii. 1, Sept. (xxix. English version).

   [2056] Chirographum.

   [2057] Matt. vi. 12.

   [2058] The Feast of Easter, the great season for baptizing. See
   Bingham, xi. 6, 7.

   [2059] Eph. iv. 26.

   [2060] Mal. iv. 2.

   [2061] Ps. xvii. 8.

   [2062] Wisd. v. 8, 9, 6.

   [2063] Matt. v. 45.

   [2064] Ps. vi. 8, Sept. (vi. 7, English version).

   [2065] Ps. iv. 5, Sept. (iv. 4, English version).

   [2066] Ps. vi. 8, Sept. (vi. 7, English version).

   [2067] Vetustatem.

   [2068] Matt. vii. 3.

   [2069] 1 John iii. 15.

   [2070] Matt. vi. 13.

   [2071] Jas. i. 13, etc.

   [2072] Concubuisti.

   [2073] Insudat aqua.

   [2074] Ambulant.

   [2075] Isa. lviii. 7, Sept.

   [2076] Luke vi. 37, 38.

   [2077] Eph. v. 16.

   [2078] Ps. xxxiv. 12.

   [2079] Ps. xxxiv. 13, 14.

   [2080] Easter Eve. See Bingham, xxi. 1, 32.

   [2081] The reading of D. F. G., some mss. ap. Chrys. and Ambr. Ar.Pol.
   Vet. Lat. Tert. Paulin, Macar, ap. Mill. Auct. quæstt. V. T. St.
   Augustin's present text has elsewhere "induti" (see Sabat.); but the
   text of the Fathers is often involuntarily conformed to the Vulgate.

   [2082] 2 Cor. v. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon IX.

   [LIX. Ben.]

   Again, on the Lord's Prayer, Matt. vi. To the Competentes.

   1. You have rehearsed what you believe, hear now what you are to pray
   for. Forasmuch as you would not be able to call on Him, in whom you
   should not first have believed; as saith the Apostle, "How shall they
   call on Him, in whom they have not believed?" [2083] Therefore have you
   first learned the Creed, where is a brief and sublime rule of your
   faith; brief in the number of its words, sublime in the weight of its
   contents. [2084] But the prayer which you receive to-day to be learned
   by heart, and to be repeated eight days hence, was dictated (as you
   heard when the Gospel was being read) by the Lord Himself to His
   disciples, and came from them unto us, since "their sound went into all
   the earth." [2085]

   2. Ye then who have found a Father in heaven, be loth to cleave to the
   things of earth. For ye are about to say, "Our Father, which art in
   heaven." [2086] You have begun to belong to a great family. Under this
   Father the lord and the slave are brethren; under this Father the
   general and the common soldier are brethren; under this Father the rich
   man and the poor are brethren. All Christian believers have divers
   fathers in earth, some noble, some obscure; but they all call upon one
   Father which is in heaven. If our Father be there, there is the
   inheritance prepared for us. But He is such a Father, that we can
   possess with Him what He giveth. For He giveth an inheritance; but He
   doth not leave it to us by dying. For He doth not depart Himself, but
   He abideth ever, that we may come to Him. Seeing then we have heard of
   Whom we are to ask, let us know also what to ask for, lest haply we
   offend such a Father by asking amiss.

   3. What then hath the Lord Jesus Christ taught us to ask of the Father
   which is in heaven? "Hallowed be Thy Name." [2087] What kind of
   blessing is this that we ask of God, that His Name may be hallowed? The
   Name of God is always Holy; why then do we pray that it may be
   hallowed, except that we may be hallowed by it? We pray then that that
   which is Holy always, may be hallowed in us. The Name of God is
   hallowed in you when ye are baptized. Why will ye offer this prayer
   after ye have been baptized, but that that which ye shall then receive
   may abide ever in you?

   4. Another petition follows, "Thy kingdom come." [2088] God's kingdom
   will come, whether we ask it or not. Why then do we ask it, but that
   that which will come to all saints may also come to us; that God may
   count us also in the number of His saints, to whom His kingdom is to
   come?

   5. We say in the third petition, "Thy will be done as in heaven, so in
   earth." [2089] What is this? That as the Angels serve Thee in heaven,
   so we may serve Thee in earth. For His holy Angels obey Him; they do
   not offend Him; they do His commands through the love of Him. This we
   pray for then, that we too may do the commands of God in love. Again,
   these words are understood in another way, "Thy will be done as in
   heaven, so in earth." Heaven in us is the soul, earth in us is the
   body. What then is, "Thy will be done as in heaven, so in earth"? As we
   hear Thy precepts, so may our flesh consent unto us; lest, whilst flesh
   and spirit strive together, we be not able to fulfil the commands of
   God.

   6. "Give us this day our daily bread," [2090] comes next in the Prayer.
   Whether we ask here of the Father support [2091] necessary for the
   body, by "bread" signifying whatever is needful for us; or whether we
   understand that daily Bread, which ye are soon to receive from the
   Altar; well it is that we pray that He would give it us. For what is it
   we pray for, but that we may commit no evil, for which we should be
   separated from that holy Bread. And the word of God which is preached
   daily is daily bread. For because it is not bread for the body, it is
   not on that account not bread for the soul. But when this life shall
   have passed away, we shall neither seek that bread which hunger seeks;
   nor shall we have to receive the Sacrament of the Altar, because we
   shall be there with Christ, whose Body we do now receive; nor will
   those words which we are now speaking, need to be said to you, nor the
   sacred volume to be read, when we shall see Him who is Himself the Word
   of God, by whom all things were made, by whom the Angels are fed, by
   whom the Angels are enlightened, by whom the Angels become wise; not
   requiring words of circuitous discourse; but drinking in the Only Word,
   filled with whom they burst forth [2092] and never fail in praise. For,
   "Blessed," saith the Psalm, "are they who dwell in Thy house; they will
   be always praising Thee." [2093]

   7. Therefore in this present life, do we ask what comes next, "Forgive
   us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors." [2094] In Baptism, all
   debts, that is, all sins, are entirely forgiven us. But because no one
   can live without sin here below, and if without any great crime which
   entails separation from the Altar, yet altogether without sins can no
   one live on this earth, and we can only receive the one Baptism once
   for all; in this Prayer we hear how we may day by day be washed, that
   our sins may day by day be forgiven us; but only if we do what follows,
   "As we also forgive our debtors." Accordingly, my Brethren, I advise
   you, who are in the grace of God my sons, yet my Brethren under that
   heavenly Father; I advise you, whenever any one offends and sins
   against you, and comes, and confesses, and asks your pardon, that ye do
   pardon him, and forthwith from the heart forgive him; lest ye keep off
   from your own selves that pardon, which comes from God. For if ye
   forgive not, neither will He forgive you. Therefore it is in this life
   that we make this petition, for that it is in this life that sins can
   be forgiven, where they can be done. But in the life to come they are
   not forgiven, because they are not done.

   8. Next after this we pray, saying, "Lead us not into temptation, but
   deliver us from evil." [2095] This also, that we be not led into
   temptation, it is necessary for us to ask in this life, because in this
   life there are temptations; and that "we may be delivered from evil,"
   because there is evil here. And thus of all these seven petitions,
   three have respect to the life eternal, and four to the present life.
   "Hallowed be Thy name." This will be for ever. "Thy kingdom come." This
   kingdom will be for ever. "Thy will be done as in heaven, so in earth."
   This will be for ever. "Give us this day our daily bread." This will
   not be for ever. "Forgive us our debts." This will not be for ever.
   "Lead us not into temptation." This will not be for ever. "But deliver
   us from evil." This will not be for ever: but where there is
   temptation, and where there is evil, there is it necessary that we make
   this petition.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2083] Rom. x. 14.

   [2084] Sententiarum.

   [2085] Ps. xviii. 5, Sept. (xix. 4, English version).

   [2086] Matt. vi. 9.

   [2087] Matt. vi. 9.

   [2088] Matt. vi. 10.

   [2089] Matt. vi. 10.

   [2090] Matt. vi. 11.

   [2091] Exhibitionem.

   [2092] Ructuant.

   [2093] Ps. lxxxiv. 4.

   [2094] Matt. vi. 12.

   [2095] Matt. vi. 13.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon X.

   [LX. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. vi. 19, "Lay not up for yourselves
   treasures upon earth," etc. An exhortation to alms-deeds.

   1. Every man who is in any trouble, and his own resources fail him,
   looks out for some prudent person from whom he may take counsel, and so
   know what to do. Let us suppose then the whole world to be as it were
   one single man. He seeks to escape evil, yet is slow in doing good; and
   as in this way tribulations thicken, and his own resources fail, whom
   can he find more prudent to receive counsel from than Christ? By all
   means, at least, let him find a better, and do what he will. But if he
   cannot find a better, let him come to Him whom he may find everywhere:
   let him consult, and take advice from Him, keep the good commandment,
   escape the great evil. For present temporal ills of which men are so
   sore afraid, under which they murmur exceedingly, and by their
   murmuring offend Him who is correcting them, so that they find not His
   saving Help; [2096] present ills I say without a doubt are but passing;
   either they pass through us, or we pass through them; either they pass
   away whilst we live, or they are left behind us when we die. Now that
   is not in the matter of tribulation great, which in duration is short.
   Whosoever thou art that art thinking of to-morrow, thou dost not recall
   the remembrance of yesterday. When the day after to-morrow comes, this
   to-morrow also will be yesterday. But now if men are so disquieted with
   anxiety to escape temporal tribulations which pass, or rather fly over,
   what thought ought they to take that they may escape those which abide
   and endure without end?

   2. A hard condition is the life of man. What else is it to be born, but
   to enter on a life of toil? Of our toil that is to be, the infant's
   very cry is witness. From this cup [2097] of sorrow no one may be
   excused. The cup that Adam hath pledged, must be drunk. We were made,
   it is true, by the hands of Truth, but because of sin we were cast
   forth upon days of vanity. "We were made after the image of God,"
   [2098] but we [2099] disfigured it by sinful transgression. Therefore
   does the Psalm remind us how we were made, and to what a state we have
   come. For it says, "Though a man walk in the image [2100] of God." See,
   what he was made. Whither hath he come? Hearken to what follows, "Yet
   will he be disquieted in vain." [2101] He walks in the image of truth,
   and will be disquieted in the counsel of vanity. Finally, see his
   disquiet, see it, and as it were in a glass, be displeased with
   thyself. "Though," he says, "man walk in the image of God," and
   therefore be something great, "yet will he be disquieted in vain;" and
   as though we might ask, How I pray thee, how is man disquieted in vain?
   "He heapeth up treasure," saith he, "and knoweth not for whom he doth
   gather it." See then, this man, that is the whole human race
   represented as one man, who is without resource in his own case, and
   hath lost counsel and wandered out of the way of a sound mind; "Heapeth
   up treasure, and knoweth not for whom he doth gather it." What is more
   mad, what more unhappy? But surely he is doing it for himself? Not so.
   Why not for himself? Because he must die, because the life of man is
   short, because the treasure lasts, but he who gathereth it, quickly
   passeth away. As pitying therefore the man who "walketh in the image of
   God," who confesseth things that are true, yet followeth after vain
   things, he saith, "He will be disquieted in vain." I grieve for him;
   "he heapeth up treasure, and knoweth not for whom he doth gather it."
   Doth he gather it for himself? No. Because the man dies whilst the
   treasure endures. For whom then? If thou hast any good counsel, give it
   to me. But counsel hast thou none to give me, and so thou hast none for
   thyself. Wherefore if we are both without it, let us both seek it, let
   us both receive it, and both consider the matter together. He is
   disquieted, he heapeth up treasure, he thinks, and toils, and is kept
   awake by anxiety. All day long art thou harassed by labour, all night
   agitated by fear. That thy coffer may be filled with money, thy soul is
   in a fever of anxiety.

   3. I see it, I am grieved for thee; thou art disquieted, and as He who
   cannot deceive, assures us, "Thou art disquieted in vain." For thou art
   heaping up treasures: supposing that all thy undertakings succeed, to
   say nothing of losses, of so great perils and deaths in the prosecution
   of every several kind of gain (I speak not of deaths of the body, but
   of evil thoughts, for that gold may come in, uprightness [2102] goeth
   out; that thou mayest be clothed outwardly, thou art made naked
   within), but to pass over these, and other such things in silence, to
   pass by all the things that are against thee, let us think only of the
   favourable circumstances. See, thou art laying up treasures, gains flow
   into thee from every quarter, and thy money runs like fountains;
   everywhere where want presseth, there doth abundance flow. Hast thou
   not heard, "If riches increase, set not your heart upon them?" [2103]
   Lo, thou art getting, thou art disquieted, not fruitlessly indeed,
   still in vain. "How," thou wilt ask "am I disquieted in vain? I am
   filling my coffers, my walls will scarce hold what I get, how then am I
   disquieted in vain?" "Thou art heaping up treasure, and dost not know
   for whom thou gatherest it." Or if thou dost know, I pray thee tell me.
   I will listen to thee. For whom is it? If thou art not disquieted in
   vain, tell me for whom thou art heaping up thy treasure? "For myself,"
   thou sayest. Dost thou dare say so, who must so soon die? "For my
   children." Dost thou dare say this of them who must so soon die? It is
   a great duty of natural affection [2104] (it will be said) for a father
   to lay up for his sons; rather it is a great vanity, one who must soon
   die is laying up for those who must soon die also. If it is for
   thyself, why dost thou gather, seeing thou leavest all when thou diest.
   This is the case also with thy children; they will succeed thee, but
   not to abide long. I say nothing about what sort of children they may
   be, whether haply debauchery may not waste what covetousness hath
   amassed. So another by dissoluteness [2105] squanders what thou by much
   toil hast gathered together. But I pass over this. It may be they will
   be good children, they will not be dissolute, they will keep what thou
   hast left, will increase what thou hast kept, and will not dissipate
   what thou hast heaped together. Then will thy children be equally vain
   with thyself, if they do so, if in this they imitate thee their father.
   I would say to them what I said just now to thee. I would say to thy
   son, to him for whom thou art saving I would say, "Thou art heaping up
   treasure, and knowest not for whom thou dost gather it." For as thou
   knewest not, so neither doth he know. If the vanity hath continued in
   him, hath the truth lost its power with respect to him?

   4. I forbear to urge, that it may be even during thy life thou art but
   laying up for thieves. In one night may they come and find all ready
   the gathering of so many days and nights. It may be thou art laying up
   for a robber, or a highwayman. I will say no more on this, lest I call
   to mind and re-open the wound of past sufferings. How many things which
   an empty vanity hath heaped together, hath the cruelty of an enemy
   found ready to its hand. It is not my place to wish for this: but it is
   the concern of all to fear it. May God avert it! May His own scourges
   be sufficient. May He to whom we pray, spare us! But if He ask thee for
   whom are we laying by, what shall we answer? How then, O man, whosoever
   thou art, that are heaping up treasure in vain, how wilt thou answer
   me, as I handle this matter with thee, and with thee seek counsel in a
   common cause? For thou didst speak and make answer, "I am laying up for
   myself, for my children, for my posterity." I have said already how
   many grounds of fear there are, even as to those children themselves.
   But I pass over the consideration, that thy children may so live as to
   be a curse [2106] to thee, and as thine enemy would wish them; grant
   that they live as the father himself would have them. Yet how many have
   fallen into those mischances, I have declared, and reminded you of
   already. Thou didst shudder at them, though thou didst not amend
   thyself. For what hast thou to answer but this, "Perhaps it may not be
   so"? Well, I said so too; perhaps I say thou art but laying up for the
   thief, or robber, or highwayman. I did not say certainly, but perhaps.
   Where there is a perhaps, there is a perhaps-not; so then thou knowest
   not what will be, and therefore thou "art disquieted in vain." Thou
   seest now how truly spake the Truth, how vainly vanity is disquieted.
   Thou hast heard and at length learnt wisdom, because when thou sayest,
   "Perhaps it is for my children," but dost not dare to say, "I am sure
   that it is for my children," thou dost not in fact know for whom thou
   art gathering riches. So then, as I see, and have said already, thou
   art thyself without resource; thou findest nothing wherewith to answer
   me, nor can I to answer thee.

   5. Let us both therefore seek and ask for counsel. We have opportunity
   of consulting not any wise man, but Wisdom Herself. Let us then both
   give ear to Jesus Christ, "to the Jews a stumbling stone, and to the
   Gentiles foolishness, but to them who are called, both Jews and Greeks,
   Christ the Power of God and the Wisdom of God." [2107] Why art thou
   preparing a strong defence for thy riches? Hear the Power of God,
   nothing is more strong than He. Why art thou preparing wise counsel
   [2108] to protect thy riches? Hear the Wisdom of God, nothing is more
   Wise than He. Peradventure when I say what I have to say, thou wilt be
   offended, and so thou wilt be a Jew, "because to the Jews is Christ an
   offence." Or peradventure, when I have spoken, it will appear foolish
   to thee, and so wilt thou be a Gentile, "for to the Gentiles is Christ
   foolishness." Yet thou art a Christian, thou hast been called. "But to
   them who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the Power of God
   and the Wisdom of God." Be not sad then when I have said what I have to
   say; be not offended; mock not my folly, as you deem it, with an air of
   disdain. [2109] Let us give ear. For what I am about to say, Christ
   hath said. If thou despise the herald, yet fear the Judge. What shall I
   say then? The reader of the Gospel has but just now relieved me from
   this embarrassment. I will not read anything fresh, but will recall
   only to your recollection what has just been read. Thou wast seeking
   counsel, as failing in thine own resources; see then what the Fountain
   of right counsel saith, the Fountain from whose streams is no fear of
   poison, fill from It what thou mayest.

   6. "Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust
   doth destroy, and where thieves break through and steal: But lay up for
   yourselves treasures in heaven, where no thief approacheth, nor moth
   corrupteth: For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also."
   [2110] What more dost thou wait for? The thing is plain. The counsel is
   open, but evil desire lies hid; nay, not so, but what is worse, it too
   lies open. For plunder does not cease its ravages; avarice does not
   cease to defraud; maliciousness does not cease to swear falsely. And
   all for what? that treasure may be heaped together. To be laid up
   where? In the earth, and rightly indeed, by earth for earth. For to the
   man who sinned and who pledged us, as I have said, our cup of toil, was
   it said, "Earth thou art, and to earth shalt thou return." [2111] With
   good reason is the treasure in earth, because the heart is there. Where
   then is that, "we lift them up unto the Lord?" Sorrow for your case, ye
   who have understood me; and if ye sorrow truly, amend yourselves. How
   long will ye be applauding and not doing? What ye have heard is true,
   nothing truer. Let that then which is true be done. One God we praise,
   yet we change not, that we may not in this very praise be disquieted in
   vain.

   7. Therefore, "Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth;" whether
   ye have found by experience how what is laid up in the earth is lost,
   or whether ye have not so experienced it, yet do ye too fear lest ye
   should do so. Let experience reform him whom words will not reform. One
   cannot rise up now, one cannot go out, but all together with one voice
   are crying, "Woe to us, the world is falling." [2112] If it be falling,
   why dost thou not remove? If an architect were to tell thee, that thy
   house would soon fall, wouldest thou not remove before thou didst
   indulge in thy vain lamentations? The Builder of the world telleth thee
   the world will soon fall, and wilt thou not believe it? Hear the voice
   of Him who foretelleth it, hear the counsel of Him who giveth thee
   warning. The voice of prediction is, "Heaven and earth shall pass
   away." [2113] The voice of warning is, "Lay not up for yourselves
   treasure on earth." [2114] If then thou dost believe God in His
   prediction; if thou despise not His warning, let what He says be done.
   He who has given thee such counsel doth not deceive thee. Thou shalt
   not lose what thou hast given away, but shalt follow what thou hast
   only sent before thee. Therefore my counsel is, "Give to the poor, and
   thou shalt have treasure in heaven." [2115] Thou shalt not remain
   without treasure; but what thou hast on earth with anxiety, thou shalt
   possess in heaven free from care. Transport thy goods then. I am giving
   thee counsel for keeping, not for losing. "Thou shalt have," saith He,
   "treasure in heaven, and come, follow Me," that I may bring thee to thy
   treasure. This is not a wasting, but a saving. Why do men keep silence?
   Let them hear, and having at last by experience found what to fear, let
   them do that which will give them no cause of fear, let them transport
   their goods to heaven. Thou puttest wheat in the low ground; [2116] and
   thy friend comes, who knows the nature of the corn and the land, and
   instructs thy unskilfulness, and says to thee, "What hast thou done?"
   Thou hast put the corn in the flat soil, in the lower land; the soil is
   moist; it will all rot, and thou wilt lose thy labour. Thou answerest,
   What then must I do? Remove it, he says, into the higher ground. Dost
   thou then give ear to a friend who gives thee counsel about thy corn,
   and despisest thou God who gives thee counsel about thine heart? Thou
   fearest to put thy corn in the low earth, and wilt thou lose thy heart
   in the earth? Behold the Lord thy God when He giveth thee counsel
   touching thine heart, saith, "Where thy treasure is, there will thy
   heart be also." [2117] Lift up, saith He, thine heart to heaven, that
   it rot not in the earth. It is His counsel, who wisheth to preserve thy
   heart, not to destroy it.

   8. If then this be so, what must be their repentance who have not done
   thereafter? How must they now reproach themselves! We might have had in
   heaven what we have now lost in earth. The enemy has broken up our
   house; but could he break heaven open? He has killed the servant who
   was set to guard; but could he kill the Lord who would have kept them,
   "where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth." How many now are
   saying, "There we might have had, and hid our treasures safe, where
   after a little while we might have followed them securely. Why have we
   not hearkened to our Lord? Why have we despised the admonitions of the
   Father, and so have experienced the invasion of the enemy?" If then
   this be good counsel, let us not be slow in taking heed to it; and if
   what we have must be transported, let us transfer it into that place,
   from whence we cannot lose it. What are the poor to whom we give, but
   our [2118] carriers, [2119] by whom we convey our goods from earth to
   heaven? Give then: thou art but giving to thy carrier, he carrieth what
   thou givest to heaven. How, sayest thou, does he carry it to heaven?
   For I see that he makes an end of it by eating. No doubt, he carries
   it, not by keeping it, but by making it his food. What? Hast thou
   forgotten, "Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom; for I
   was an hungred, and ye gave Me meat:" and," Inasmuch as ye did it to
   one of the least of Mine, ye did it to Me." [2120] If thou hast not
   despised the beggar that standeth before thee, consider to Whom what
   thou gavest him hath come. "Inasmuch," saith he, "as ye did it to one
   of the least of Mine, ye did it to Me." He hath received it, who gave
   thee wherewith to give. He hath received it, who in the end will give
   His Own Self to thee.

   9. For this have I at divers times called to your remembrance, Beloved,
   and I confess to you it astonishes me much in the Scriptures of God,
   and I ought repeatedly to call your attention to it. I pray you to
   think of what our Lord Jesus Christ Himself saith, that at the end of
   the world, when He shall come to judgment, He will gather together all
   nations before Him, and will divide men into two parts; that He will
   place some at His right hand, and others on His left; and will say to
   those on the right hand, "Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the
   kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." But to
   those on the left, "Depart ye into everlasting fire, prepared for the
   devil and his angels." Search out the reasons either for so great a
   reward, or so great a punishment. "Receive the kingdom," and "Go into
   everlasting fire." Why shall the first receive the kingdom? "For I was
   an hungred, and ye gave Me meat." Why shall the other depart into
   everlasting fire? "For I was hungry, and ye gave Me no meat." What
   meaneth this, I ask? I see touching those who are to receive the
   kingdom, that they gave as good and faithful Christians, not despising
   the words of the Lord, and with sure trust hoping for the promises they
   did accordingly; because had they not done so, this very barrenness
   would not surely have accorded with their good life. For it may be they
   were chaste, no cheats, nor drunkards, and kept themselves from evil
   works. Yet if they had not added good works, they would have remained
   barren. For they would have kept, "Depart from evil," but they would
   not have kept, "and do good." [2121] Notwithstanding, even to them He
   doth not say, "Come, receive the kingdom," for ye have lived in
   chastity; ye have defrauded no man, ye have not oppressed any poor man,
   ye have invaded no one's landmark, ye have deceived no one by oath. He
   said not this, but, "Receive the kingdom, because I was an hungred, and
   ye gave Me meat." How excellent is this above all, when the Lord made
   no mention of the rest, but named this only! And again to the others,
   "Depart ye into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
   angels. How many things could He urge against the ungodly, were they to
   ask, "Why are we going into everlasting fire!" Why? Do ye ask, ye
   adulterers, menslayers, cheats, sacrilegious blasphemers, unbelievers.
   Yet none of these did He name, but, "Because I was hungry, and ye gave
   Me no meat."

   10. I see that you are surprised as I am. And indeed it is a marvellous
   thing. But I gather as best I can the reason of this thing so strange,
   and I will not conceal it from you. It is written, "As water quencheth
   fire, so alms quencheth sin." [2122] Again it is written, "Shut up alms
   in the heart of a poor man, and it shall make supplication for thee
   before the Lord." [2123] Again it is written, "Hear, O king, my
   counsel, and redeem thy sins by alms." [2124] And many other
   testimonies of the Divine oracles are there, whereby it is shown that
   alms avail much to the quenching and effacing of sins. Wherefore to
   those whom He is about to condemn, yea, rather to those whom He is
   about to crown, He will impute alms only, as though He would say, "It
   were a hard matter for me not to find occasion to condemn you, were I
   to examine and weigh you accurately and with much exactness to
   scrutinize your deeds; but, "Go into the kingdom, for I was hungry, and
   ye gave Me meat." Ye shall therefore go into the kingdom, not because
   ye have not sinned, but because ye have redeemed your sins by alms. And
   again to the others, "Go ye into everlasting fire, prepared for the
   devil and his angels." They too, guilty as they are, old in their sins,
   late in their fear for them, in what respect, when they turn their sins
   over in their mind, could they dare to say that they are undeservedly
   condemned, that this sentence is pronounced against them undeservedly
   by so righteous a Judge? In considering their consciences, and all the
   wounds of their souls, in what respect could they dare to say, We are
   unjustly condemned. Of whom it was said before in Wisdom, "Their own
   iniquities shall convince them to their face." [2125] Without doubt
   they will see that they are justly condemned for their sins and
   wickednesses; yet it will be as though He said to them, "It is not in
   consequence of this that ye think, but because I was hungry, and ye
   gave Me no meat.'" For if turning away from all these your deeds, and
   turning to Me, ye had redeemed all those crimes and sins by alms, those
   alms would now deliver you, and absolve you from the guilt of so great
   offences; for, "Blessed are the merciful, for to them shall be shown
   mercy." [2126] But now go away into everlasting fire. "He shall have
   judgment without mercy, who hath showed no mercy." [2127]

   11. O that I may have induced you, my brethren, to give away your
   earthly bread, and to knock for the heavenly! The Lord is that Bread.
   He saith, "I am the Bread of life." [2128] But how shall He give to
   thee, who givest not to him that is in need? One is in need before
   thee, and thou art in need before Another, and since thou art in need
   before Another, and another is in need before thee, that other is in
   need before him who is in need himself. For He before whom thou art in
   need, needeth nothing. Do then to others as thou wouldest have done to
   thee. For it is not in this case as with those friends who are wont to
   upbraid in a way one another with their kindnesses; as, "I did this for
   thee," and the other answers, "and I this for thee," that He wishes us
   to do Him some good office, because He has first done such an office
   for us. He is in want of nothing, and therefore is He the very Lord. I
   said unto the Lord, "Thou art my God, for Thou needest not my goods."
   [2129] Notwithstanding though He be the Lord, and the Very Lord, and
   needeth not our goods, yet that we might do something even for Him,
   hath He vouchsafed to be hungry in His poor. "I was hungry," saith He,
   "and ye gave Me meat. Lord, when saw we Thee hungry? Forasmuch as ye
   did it to one of the least of Mine, ye did it to Me." [2130] To be
   brief then, let men hear, and consider as they ought, how great a merit
   it is to have fed Christ when He hungereth, and how great a crime it is
   to have despised Christ when He hungereth.

   12. Repentance for sins changes men, it is true, for the better; but it
   does not appear as if even it would profit ought, if it should be
   barren of works of mercy. This the Truth testifieth by the mouth of
   John, who said to them that came to him, "O generation of vipers, who
   hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth therefore
   fruits worthy of repentance; And say not we have Abraham to our father;
   for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up
   children unto Abraham. For now is the axe laid unto the root of the
   trees. Every tree therefore that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be
   cut down, and cast into the fire." [2131] Touching this fruit he said
   above, "Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance." Whoso then bringeth
   not forth these fruits, hath no cause to think that he shall attain
   [2132] pardon for his sins by a barren repentance. Now what these
   fruits are, he showeth afterwards himself. For after these his words
   the multitude asked him, saying, "What shall we do then?" That is, what
   are these fruits, which thou exhortest us with such alarming force to
   bring forth? "But he answering said unto them, he that hath two coats,
   let him give to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do
   likewise." My brethren, what is more plain, what more certain, or
   express than this? What other meaning then can that have which he said
   above, "Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be cut
   down, and cast into the fire;" but that same which they on the left
   shall hear, "Go ye into everlasting fire, for I was hungry, and ye gave
   Me no meat." So then it is but a small matter to depart from sins, if
   thou shalt neglect to cure what is past, as it is written, "Son, thou
   hast sinned, do so no more." And that he might not think to be secure
   by this only, he saith, "And for thy former sins pray that they may be
   forgiven thee." [2133] But what will it profit thee to pray for
   forgiveness, if thou shalt not make thyself meet to be heard, by not
   bringing forth fruits meet for repentance, that thou shouldest be cut
   down as a barren tree, and be cast into the fire? If then ye will be
   heard when ye pray for pardon of your sins, "Forgive, and it shall be
   forgiven you; Give, and it shall be given you." [2134]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2096] Salvatorem.

   [2097] Convivio.

   [2098] Gen. i. 27.

   [2099] Detrivimus.

   [2100] St. Ambrose, ad loc., observes that Dei is not in the Greek but
   explains "in imagine" in the same sense, as does St. Augustin, ad loc.,
   where he had not "Dei." It seems a sort of gloss. It occurs in Cassiod.
   Anon. de Trin. ap. St. Ambrose.

   [2101] Ps. xxxviii. 7, Sept. (xxxix. 6, English version).

   [2102] Fides.

   [2103] Ps. lxii. 10.

   [2104] Pietas.

   [2105] Fluendo.

   [2106] Poenaliter.

   [2107] 1 Cor. i. 23, 24.

   [2108] Argumenta.

   [2109] Ore torto.

   [2110] Matt. vi. 19-21.

   [2111] Gen. iii. 19, Sept.

   [2112] From this and the preceding sections it would appear as if this
   Sermon was written at a time of some great public trouble, probably
   when the barbarians were ravaging Africa.

   [2113] Matt. xxiv. 35.

   [2114] Matt. vi. 19.

   [2115] Matt. xix. 21.

   [2116] In terra.

   [2117] Matt. vi. 21.

   [2118] Vide Sermon 18. 4, and Sermon 38. 9.

   [2119] Laturarii.

   [2120] Matt. xxv. 34, etc.

   [2121] Ps. xxxiv. 14.

   [2122] Ecclus. iii. 30.

   [2123] Ecclus. xxix. 12, Vulgate.

   [2124] Dan. iv. 24, Sept. (iv. 27, English version).

   [2125] Wisd. iv. 20.

   [2126] Matt. v. 7.

   [2127] Jas. ii. 13.

   [2128] John vi. 35.

   [2129] Ps. xv. 2, Sept. (xvi. 2, English version).

   [2130] Matt. xxv. 35, etc.

   [2131] Luke iii. 7, etc.

   [2132] Mereri.

   [2133] Ecclus. xxi. 1.

   [2134] Luke vi. 37, 38.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XI.

   [LXI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. vii. 7, "Ask, and it shall be given
   you;" etc. An exhortation to alms-deeds.

   1. In the lesson of the Holy Gospel the Lord hath exhorted us to
   prayer. "Ask," saith He, "and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall
   find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asketh
   receiveth, and he that seeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh it
   shall be opened. Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask
   bread, will he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him
   a serpent? [2135] Or if he ask an egg, will he offer him a scorpion?
   [2136] If ye then," saith He, "though ye be evil, know how to give good
   gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in
   heaven give good things to them that ask Him? [2137] Though ye be
   evil," He saith, "ye know how to give good gifts unto your children." A
   marvellous thing, Brethren! we are evil: yet have we a good Father.
   What is more evident? We have heard our proper name: "Though ye be
   evil, ye know how to give good gifts unto your children." And now see
   what kind of Father He showeth them, whom he called evil. "How much
   more shall your Father?" Father of whom? undoubtedly of the evil. And
   what kind of Father? "None is good but God only." [2138]

   2. For this cause have we who are evil a good Father, that we may not
   always continue evil. No evil man can make another man good. If no evil
   man can make another good, how can an evil man make himself good? He
   only can make of an evil man a good man, who is good eternally. "Heal
   me, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved." [2139] Why
   then do those vain ones [2140] say to me in words vain as themselves,
   "Thou canst save thyself if thou wilt"? "Heal me, O Lord, and I shall
   be healed." We were created good by The Good; for "God made man
   upright," [2141] but by our own free will, we became evil. We had power
   from being good to become evil, and we shall have power from being evil
   to become good. But it is He who is ever Good, who maketh the good out
   of the evil; for man by his own will had no power to heal himself. Thou
   dost not look out for a physician to wound thyself; but when thou hast
   wounded thyself, thou lookest out for one to cure thee. Good things
   then after the time present, temporal good things, such as are
   concerned with the body and flesh, we do know how to give to our
   children, even though we are evil. For even these are good things, who
   would doubt it? A fish, an egg, bread, fruit, wheat, the light we see,
   the air we breathe, all these are good; the very riches by which men
   are lifted up, and which make them loth to acknowledge other men to be
   their equals; by which, I say, men are lifted up rather in love of
   their dazzling clothing, than with any thought of their common nature,
   even these riches, I repeat, are good; but all these goods which I have
   now mentioned may be possessed by good and bad alike; and though they
   be good themselves, yet cannot they make their owners good.

   3. A good then there is which maketh good, and a good there is whereby
   thou mayest do good. The Good which maketh good is God. For none can
   make man good, save He who is Good eternally. Therefore that thou
   mayest be good, call upon God. But there is another good whereby thou
   mayest do good, and that is, whatever thou mayest possess. There is
   gold, there is silver; they are good, not such as can make thee good,
   but whereby thou mayest do good. Thou hast gold and silver, and thou
   desirest more gold and silver. Thou both hast, and desirest to have;
   thou art at once full, and thirsty. This is a disease, not opulence.
   When men are in the dropsy, [2142] they are full of water, and yet are
   always thirsty. They are full of water, and yet they thirst for water.
   How then canst thou take pleasure in opulence, who hast thereby this
   dropsical desire? Gold then thou hast, it is good; yet thou hast not
   whereby thou canst be made good, but whereby thou canst do good. Dost
   thou ask, What good can I do with gold? Hast thou not heard in the
   Psalm, "He hath dispersed abroad, he hath given to the poor, his
   righteousness remaineth for ever." [2143] This is good, this is the
   good whereby thou art made good; righteousness. If thou have the good
   whereby thou art made good, do good with that good which cannot make
   thee good. Thou hast money, deal it out freely. By dealing it out
   freely, thou increasest righteousness. "For he hath dispersed abroad,
   hath distributed, hath given to the poor; his righteousness remaineth
   for ever." See what is diminished and what increased. Thy money is
   diminished, thy righteousness increased. That is diminished which thou
   must soon have lost, that diminished which thou must soon have left
   behind thee; that increased which thou shalt possess for ever.

   4. It is then a secret of gainful dealing I am giving; learn so to
   trade. For thou dost commend the merchant who selleth lead and getteth
   gold, and wilt thou not commend the merchant, who layeth out money, and
   getteth righteousness? But thou wilt say, I do not lay out my money,
   because I have not righteousness. Let him who has righteousness lay his
   money out; I have not righteousness, so at least let me have my money.
   Dost thou not then wish to lay out thy money, because thou hast not
   righteousness? Yea, lay it out then rather that thou mayest have
   righteousness. For from whence shalt thou have righteousness but from
   God, the Fountain of righteousness? Therefore, if thou wilt have
   righteousness, be God's beggar, who just now out of the Gospel urged
   thee to ask, and seek, and knock. He knew His beggar, and lo the
   Householder, the mighty rich One, rich, to wit, in riches spiritual and
   eternal, exhorteth thee and saith, "Ask, seek, knock; he that asketh
   receiveth, he that seeketh findeth, to him that knocketh it shall be
   opened." [2144] He exhorteth thee to ask, and will he refuse thee what
   thou askest?

   5. Consider a similitude or comparison drawn from a contrary case (as
   of that unjust judge), which is an encouragement to us to prayer.
   "There was," saith the Lord, "in a city a certain judge, which feared
   not God, neither regarded man." [2145] A certain widow importuned him
   daily, and said, "Avenge me." He would not for a long time; but she
   ceased not to petition, and he did through her importunity what he
   would not of his own good will. [2146] For thus by a contrary case hath
   He recommended us to pray.

   6. Again, He saith, "A certain man to whom some guest had come, went to
   his friend, and began to knock and say, A guest is come to me, lend me
   three loaves." He answered, "I am already in bed, and my servants with
   me." The other does not leave off, but stands and presses his case, and
   knocks and begs as one friend of another. And what saith He? "I say
   unto you that he riseth, and not because of his friendship," but
   "because of the other's importunity he giveth him as many as he wanted.
   Not because of his friendship," though he is his friend, but "because
   of his importunity." [2147] What is the meaning of "because of his
   importunity?" Because he did not leave off knocking; because even when
   his request was refused, he did not turn away. He who was not willing
   to give, gave what was asked, because the other fainted not in asking.
   How much more then shall that Good One give who exhorteth us to ask,
   who is displeased if we ask not? But when at times He giveth somewhat
   slowly, it is that He is showing us the value of His good [2148]
   things; not that He refuses them. Things which have been long desired,
   are obtained with the greater pleasure, whereas those which are given
   quickly, are held cheap. Ask then, seek, be instant. By the very asking
   and seeking thou dost grow so as to contain the more. God is keeping in
   reserve for thee, what it is not His will to give thee quickly, that
   thou mayest learn for great things to long with great desire. Therefore
   "ought we always to pray, and not to faint." [2149]

   7. If then God hath made us His beggars by admonishing, and exhorting,
   and commanding us to ask, and seek, and knock, let us for our part pay
   regard to those who ask from us. We ask, and from whom do we ask? Who
   are we that ask? What do we ask? From whom, or who are we, or what is
   it that we ask? We ask of the Good God; and we that ask are evil men;
   but we ask for righteousness, whereby we may be good. We ask then for
   that which we may have for ever, wherewith when we shall be filled, we
   shall want no more. But in order that we may be filled, let us hunger
   and thirst; hungering and thirsting, let us ask, and seek, and knock.
   "For blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness."
   [2150] Wherefore are they blessed? They do hunger and thirst, and are
   they blessed? Is want ever a blessing? They are not blessed in that
   they hunger and thirst, but in that they will be filled. There will
   there be blessedness, in the fulness, not in the hunger. But hunger
   must go before the fulness, that no loathing attach to the bread.

   8. We have said then, from whom it is that we ask, and who we are that
   ask, and what we ask. But we also are asked ourselves. For we are God's
   mendicants; that He may acknowledge His mendicants, let us on our part
   acknowledge ours. But let us think in this case again, when anything is
   asked of us, who they are that ask, from whom they ask, and what they
   ask? Who then are they that ask? Men. From whom do they ask? From men.
   Who are they that ask? Mortals. From whom? From mortals. Who are they
   that ask? Frail beings. From whom? From frail beings. Who are they that
   ask? Wretches. And from whom? From wretches. Excepting in the matter of
   wealth, they that ask are as they of whom they ask. With what face
   canst thou ask before thy lord, who dost not acknowledge thine own
   equal? "I am not," he will say, "as he is," far be it from me to be
   such as he. It is thus that one clad in silk, and puffed up with pride,
   speaks of one who is wrapped in rags. But I ask you when you both are
   stripped. I ask you not as you are now when clothed, but as you were
   when you were first born. Both were naked, both weak, beginning a life
   of misery, and therefore beginning it with cries.

   9. See then, recall, O rich man, to mind thy first beginnings; see
   whether thou broughtest anything into the world. Now thou hast come
   indeed, and hast found so great abundance. But tell me, I pray thee,
   what didst thou bring hither? Tell me, or if thou art ashamed to say,
   hear the Apostle. "We brought nothing into this world." [2151] He
   saith, "We brought nothing into this world." But perhaps because thou
   broughtest in nothing, but yet hast found much here, thou wilt take
   away something hence? This too, peradventure through love of riches,
   thou art afraid to confess. Hear this also, and let the Apostle who
   will not flatter, tell thee. "We brought nothing into this world," to
   wit when we were born; "neither can we carry anything out," to wit when
   we shall depart out of the world. Thou broughtest in nothing, and thou
   shalt carry nothing away. Why then dost thou puff up thyself against
   the poor man? When infants first are born, let only the parents,
   servants, dependants, and the crowds of obsequious attendants, get out
   of the way; and then let the wealthy children with their cries be
   recognised. Let the rich woman and the poor give birth together; let
   them take no notice of their children, let them go away for a little
   while; then let them return, and recognise them if they can. See then,
   O rich man, "thou broughtest nothing into this world; neither canst
   thou carry anything out." What I have said of them at their birth, I
   may say of them in death. If it be not so, when by any chance old
   sepulchres are broken up, let the bones of the rich be recognised if
   they can. Therefore, thou rich man, give ear to the Apostle, "We
   brought nothing into this world." Acknowledge it, true it is. "Neither
   can we carry anything out." Acknowledge it, this is true also.

   10. What follows then? "Having food and covering, let us be therewith
   content; for they who wish to be rich fall into temptation, and many
   and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For
   avarice is the root of all evil, which some following after, have erred
   from the faith." [2152] Now consider what they have abandoned. Grieved
   thou art that they have abandoned this, but see now in what they have
   entangled themselves. Hear; "They have erred from the faith, and
   entangled themselves in many sorrows." But who? "They who wish to be
   rich." It is one thing to be rich, another to wish to become rich. He
   is rich, who is born of rich parents, and he is rich not because he
   wished it, but because many left him their inheritances. His [2153]
   wealth I see, I make no question as to the pleasure he takes in it. In
   this Scripture it is covetousness that is condemned, not gold, or
   silver, or riches, but covetousness. For they who do not wish to become
   rich, or do not care about it, who do not burn with covetous desires,
   nor are inflamed by the fires of avarice, but who yet are rich, let
   them hear the Apostle (it has been read to-day), "Charge them that are
   rich in this world." [2154] Charge them what? Charge them before all
   things, not to be proud in their conceits, for there is nothing which
   riches do so much generate as pride. Each several fruit, each several
   grain of corn, each several tree, has its peculiar worm, and the worm
   of the apple is of one kind, and of the pear another, and of the bean
   another, and of the wheat another. The worm of riches is [2155] pride.

   11. "Charge therefore the rich of this world that they be not proud in
   their conceits." He hath shut out the abuse, [2156] let him teach now
   the proper use. "That they be not proud in their conceits." But whence
   cometh the defence against pride? From that which follows: "Nor trust
   in the uncertainty of riches." They who trust not in the uncertainty of
   riches, are not proud in their conceits. If they be not proud in their
   conceits, let them fear. If they fear, they are not proud in their
   conceits. How many are they who were rich yesterday, and are poor
   to-day? How many go to sleep rich, and through robbers coming and
   taking all away, wake up poor? Therefore "charge them not to trust in
   the uncertainty of riches, but in the Living God, who giveth us richly
   all things to enjoy," things temporal, and things eternal. But things
   eternal more for enjoyment, the things temporal for use. Things
   temporal as for travellers, things eternal as for inhabitants. Things
   temporal, whereby we may do good; things eternal, whereby we may be
   made good. Therefore let the rich do this, "Let them not be proud in
   their conceits, nor trust in the uncertainty of riches, but in the
   Living God, who giveth us all things richly to enjoy." Let them do
   this. But what can they do with what they have? Hear what. "Let them be
   rich in good works, let them easily distribute." [2157] For they have
   wherewithal. Why then do they not do it? Poverty is a hard estate. But
   they may give easily, for they have the means. "Let them communicate,"
   that is, let them acknowledge their fellow-mortals as their equals.
   "Let them communicate, let them lay up for themselves a good foundation
   against the time to come." [2158] For, saith he, when I say, "Let them
   distribute easily, let them communicate," I have no wish to spoil, or
   strip them, or leave them empty. It is a painful lesson I teach; I show
   them a place to put their goods, "let them lay up in store for
   themselves." For I have no wish that they should remain in poverty.
   "Let them lay up for themselves in store." I do not bid them lose their
   goods, but I show them whither to remove them. "Let them lay up in
   store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that
   they may hold on the true [2159] life." The present then is a false
   life; let them lay hold on the true life. "For it is vanity of
   vanities, and all is vanity. What so great abundance hath man in all
   his labour, wherewith he laboureth under the sun?" [2160] Therefore the
   true life must be laid hold upon, our riches must be removed to the
   place of the true life, that we may find there what we give here. He
   maketh this exchange of our goods who also changeth ourselves.

   12. Give then, my brethren, to the poor, "Having food and covering, let
   us be therewith content." The rich man has nothing from his riches, but
   what the poor man begs of him, food and covering. What more hast thou
   from all that thou possessest? Thou hast got food and necessary
   covering. Necessary I say, not useless, not superfluous. What more dost
   thou get from thy riches? Tell me. Assuredly all thou hast more will be
   superfluous. Let thy superfluities then be the poor man's necessaries.
   But thou wilt say, I get costly banquets, I feed on costly meats. But
   the poor man, what does he feed on? On cheap food; the poor man feeds
   on cheap, and I, says he, on costly meats. Well, I ask you, when you
   both are filled, the costly enters into thee, but when it is once
   entered, what does it become? If we had but looking-glasses within us,
   should we not be put to shame for all the costly meat whereby thou hast
   been filled? The poor man hungers, and so does the rich; the poor man
   seeks to be filled, so does the rich. The poor man is filled with
   inexpensive, the rich with costly meats. Both are filled alike, the
   object [2161] whither both wish to attain is one and the same, only the
   one reaches it by a short, the other by a circuitous way. But thou wilt
   say, I relish better my costly food. True, and it is hard for thee to
   be satisfied, dainty as thou art. Thou knowest not the relish of that
   which hunger seasons. [2162] Not that I have said this to force the
   rich to feed on the meat and drink of the poor. Let the rich use what
   their infirmity has accustomed them to; but let them be sorry, that
   they are not able to do otherwise. For it would be better for them if
   they could. If then the poor man be not puffed up for his poverty, why
   shouldest thou for thine infirmity? Use then choice, and costly meats,
   because thou art so accustomed, because thou canst not do otherwise,
   because if thou dost change thy custom, thou art made ill. I grant thee
   this, make use of superfluities, but give to the poor necessaries; make
   use of costly meats, but give to the poor inexpensive food. He is
   looking to receive from thee, and thou art looking to receive from God;
   he is looking to the hand which was made as he was, and thou art
   looking to the hand that made thee, and made not thee only, but the
   poor man with thee. He set you both one and the same journey, this
   present life: you have found yourselves companions in it, you are
   walking one way: he is carrying nothing, thou art loaded excessively:
   he is carrying nothing with him, thou art carrying with thee more than
   thou dost need. Thou art loaded: give him of that thou hast; so shalt
   thou at once feed him, and lessen thine own burden.

   13. Give then to the poor; I beg, I advise, I charge, I command you.
   Give to the poor whatever ye will. For I will not conceal from you,
   Beloved, why it is that I have deemed it necessary to deliver this
   discourse to you. As I am going to and from the Church, the poor
   importune me, and beg me to speak to you, that they may receive
   something of you. They have urged me to speak to you; and when they see
   that they receive nothing from you, they suppose that all my labour
   among you is in vain. Something also they expect from me. I give them
   all I can; but have I the means sufficient to supply all their
   necessities? Forasmuch then as I have not means sufficient to supply
   all their necessity, I am at least their ambassador to you. You have
   heard and applauded; God be thanked. You have received the seed, you
   have returned an answer. But these your commendations weigh me down
   rather, and expose me to danger. I bear them, and tremble whilst I bear
   them. Nevertheless, my brethren, these your commendations are but the
   tree's leaves; it is the fruit I am in quest of.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2135] Matt. vii. 7-10.

   [2136] Luke xi. 12.

   [2137] Matt. vii. 11.

   [2138] Luke xviii. 19.

   [2139] Jer. xvii. 14.

   [2140] Pelagians.

   [2141] Eccles. vii. 29.

   [2142] Morbo.

   [2143] Ps. cxii. 9.

   [2144] Matt. vii. 8.

   [2145] Luke xviii. 2.

   [2146] Beneficio.

   [2147] Luke xi. 5, etc.

   [2148] Commendat.

   [2149] Luke xviii. 1.

   [2150] Matt. v. 6.

   [2151] 1 Tim. vi. 7.

   [2152] 1 Tim. vi. 8-10.

   [2153] Video facultates non interrogo voluptates.

   [2154] 1 Tim. vi. 17.

   [2155] Sermon 35 (85, Bened.) 3.

   [2156] Vitium.

   [2157] 1 Tim. vi. 18, Vulgate.

   [2158] 1 Tim. vi. 19.

   [2159] Veram, Vulgate.

   [2160] Eccles. i. 2, 3, Sept.

   [2161] Possessio.

   [2162] Accendit.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XII.

   [LXII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. viii. 8, "I am not worthy that thou
   shouldest come under my roof," etc., and of the words of the apostle, 1
   Cor. viii. 10, "For if a man see thee who hast knowledge sitting at
   meat in an idol's temple," etc.

   1. We have heard, as the Gospel was being read, the praise of our faith
   as manifested in humility. For when the Lord Jesus promised that He
   would go to the Centurion's house to heal His servant, He answered, "I
   am not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof: but speak the
   word only, and he shall be healed." [2163] By calling himself unworthy,
   he showed himself worthy for Christ to come not into his house, but
   into his heart. Nor would he have said this with so great faith and
   humility, had he not borne Him in his heart, of whose coming into his
   house he was afraid. For it were no great happiness for the Lord Jesus
   to enter into his house, and yet not to be in his heart. For this
   Master of humility both by word and example, sat down even in the house
   of a certain proud Pharisee, by name Simon; [2164] and though He sat
   down in his house, there was no place in this heart, "where the Son of
   Man could lay His Head." [2165]

   2. For so, as we may understand from the words of the Lord Himself, did
   He call back from His discipleship a certain proud man, who of his own
   accord was desirous to go with Him. "Lord, I will follow Thee
   whithersoever Thou goest." [2166] And the Lord seeing in his heart what
   was invisible, said, "Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
   nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay His Head." [2167] That
   is, in thee, guile like the fox doth dwell, and pride as the birds of
   heaven. But the Son of Man simple as opposed to guile, lowly as opposed
   to pride, hath not where to lay His Head; and this very laying, not the
   raising up of the head, teaches humility. Therefore doth He call back
   this one who was desirous to go, and another who refused He draweth
   onward. For in the same place He saith to a certain man, "Follow Me."
   And he said, "I will follow Thee, Lord, but let me first go and bury my
   father." [2168] His excuse was indeed a dutiful one: and therefore was
   he the more worthy to have his excuse removed, and his calling
   confirmed. What he wished to do was an act of dutifulness; but the
   Master taught him what he ought to prefer. For He wished him to be a
   preacher of the living word, to make others live. But there were others
   by whom that first necessary office might be fulfilled. "Let the dead,"
   He saith, "bury their dead." When unbelievers bury a dead body, the
   dead bury the dead. The body of the one hath lost its soul, the soul of
   the others hath lost God. For as the soul is the life of the body; so
   is God the life of the soul. As the body expires when it loses the
   soul, so doth the soul expire when it loses God. The loss of God is the
   death of the soul: the loss of the soul the death of the body. The
   death of the body is necessary; the death of the soul voluntary.

   3. The Lord then sat down in the house of a certain proud Pharisee. He
   was in his house, as I have said, and was not in his heart. But into
   this centurion's house He entered not, yet He possessed his heart.
   Zacchæus again received the Lord both in house and heart. [2169] Yet
   the centurion's faith is praised for its humility. For he said, "I am
   not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof;" [2170] and the Lord
   said, "Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not
   in Israel;" [2171] according to the flesh, that is. For he too was an
   Israelite undoubtedly according to the spirit. The Lord had come to
   fleshly Israel, that is, to the Jews, there to seek first for the lost
   sheep, among this people, and of this people also He had assumed His
   Body. "I have not found there so great faith," He saith. We can but
   measure the faith of men, as men can judge of it; but He who saw the
   inward parts, He whom no man can deceive, gave His testimony to this
   man's heart, hearing words of lowliness, and pronouncing a sentence of
   healing.

   4. But whence did he get such confidence? "I also," saith he, "am a man
   set under authority, having soldiers under me: and I say to this man,
   Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh: and to my
   servant, Do this, and he doeth it." [2172] I am an authority to certain
   who are placed under me, being myself placed under a certain authority
   above me. If then I a man under authority have the power of commanding,
   what power must Thou have, whom all powers serve? Now this man was of
   the Gentiles, for he was a centurion. At that time the Jewish nation
   had soldiers of the Roman empire among them. There he was engaged in a
   military life, according to the extent of a centurion's authority, both
   under authority himself, and having authority over others; as a subject
   obedient, ruling others who were under him. But the Lord (and mark this
   especially, Beloved, as need there is you should), though He was among
   the Jewish people only, even now announced beforehand that the Church
   should be in the whole world, for the establishment of which He would
   send Apostles; Himself not seen, yet believed on by the Gentiles: by
   the Jews seen, and put to death. For as the Lord did not in body enter
   into this man's house, and still, though in body absent, yet present in
   majesty, healed his faith, and his house; so the same Lord also was in
   body among the Jewish people only: among the other nations He was
   neither born of a Virgin, nor suffered, nor walked, nor endured His
   human sufferings, nor wrought His divine miracles. None of all this
   took place in the rest of the nations, and yet was that fulfilled which
   was spoken of Him, "A people whom I have not known, hath served Me."
   And how if it did not know Him? "Hath obeyed Me by the hearing of the
   ear." [2173] The Jewish nation knew, and crucified Him; the whole world
   besides heard and believed.

   5. This absence, so to say, of His body, and presence of His power
   among all nations, He signified also in the instance of that woman who
   had touched the edge of His garment, when He asketh, saying, "Who
   touched Me?" [2174] He asketh, as though He were absent; as though
   present, He healeth. "The multitude," say the disciples, "press Thee,
   and sayest Thou, Who touched Me?" For as if He were so walking as not
   to be touched by anybody at all, He said, "Who touched Me?" And they
   answer, "The multitude press Thee." And the Lord would seem to say, I
   am asking for one who touched, not for one who pressed Me. In this case
   also is His Body now, that is, His Church. The faith of the few
   "touches" it, the throng of the many "press" it. For ye have heard, as
   being her children, that Christ's Body is the Church, and if ye will,
   ye yourselves are so. This the Apostle says in many places, "For His
   body's sake, which is the Church;" [2175] and again, "But ye are the
   body of Christ, and members in particular." [2176] If then we are His
   body, what His body then suffered in the crowd, that doth His Church
   suffer now. It is pressed by many, touched by few. The flesh presses
   it, faith touches it. Lift up therefore your eyes, I beseech you, ye
   who have wherewithal to see. For ye have before you something to see.
   Lift up the eyes of faith, touch but the extreme border of His garment,
   it will be sufficient for saving health.

   6. See ye how that which ye have heard out of the Gospel was at that
   time to come is now present. Therefore, said He, on occasion of the
   commendation of the Centurion's faith, as in the flesh an alien, but of
   the household in heart, "Therefore I say unto you, Many shall come from
   the east and west." [2177] Not all, but "many;" yet they shall "come
   from the East and West;" the whole world is denoted by these two parts.
   "Many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down with
   Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven; but the
   children of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness." "But
   the children of the kingdom," the Jews, namely. And how "the children
   of the kingdom"? Because they received the Law; to them the Prophets
   were sent, with them was the temple and the Priesthood; they celebrated
   the figures of all the things to come. Yet of what things they
   celebrated the figures, they acknowledged not the presence. And,
   "Therefore the children of the kingdom," He saith, shall go into outer
   darkness, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth." And so we see
   the Jews reprobate, and Christians called from the East and West, to
   the heavenly banquet, to sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
   where the bread is righteousness, and the [2178] cup wisdom.

   7. Consider then, brethren, for of these are ye; ye are of this people,
   even then foretold, and now exhibited. [2179] Yes, verily, ye are of
   those who have been called from the East and West, to sit down in the
   kingdom of heaven, not in the temple of idols. Be ye then the Body of
   Christ, not the pressure of His Body. Ye have the border of His garment
   to touch, that ye may be healed of the issue of blood, that is, of
   carnal pleasures. Ye have, I say, the border of the garment to touch.
   Look upon the Apostles as the garment, by the texture of unity clinging
   closely to the sides of Christ. Among these Apostles was Paul, as it
   were the border, the least and last; as he saith himself, "I am the
   least of the Apostles." [2180] In a garment the last and least thing is
   the border. The border is in appearance contemptible, yet is it touched
   with saving efficacy. [2181] "Even to this hour we both hunger and
   thirst, and are naked and buffeted." [2182] What state so low, so
   contemptible as this! Touch then, if thou art suffering from a bloody
   flux. There will go power out of Him whose garment it is, and it will
   heal thee. The border was proposed to you just now to be touched, when
   out of the same Apostle there was read, "For if any one see him which
   hath knowledge sit at meat in an idol's temple, shall not the
   conscience of him who is weak, be emboldened to eat things offered to
   idols? And through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish, for
   whom Christ died!" [2183] How think ye may men be deceived by idols,
   which they suppose are honoured by Christians? A man may say, "God
   knows my heart." Yes, but thy brother did not know thy heart. If thou
   art weak, beware of a still greater weakness; if thou art strong, have
   a care of thy brother's weakness. They who see what you do, are
   emboldened to do more, so as to desire not only to eat, but also to
   sacrifice there. And lo, "Through thy knowledge the weak brother
   perisheth." Hear then, my brother; if thou didst disregard the weak,
   wouldest thou disregard a brother also? Awake. What if so thou sin
   against Christ Himself? For attend to what thou canst not by any means
   disregard. "But," saith he, "when ye sin so against the brethren, and
   wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ." [2184] Let them
   who disregard these words, go now, and sit at meat in the idol's
   temple; will they not be of those who press, and do not touch? And when
   they have been at meat in the idol's temple, let them come and fill the
   Church; not to receive saving health, but to make a pressure there.

   8. But thou wilt say, I am afraid lest I offend those above me. By all
   means be afraid of offending them, and so thou wilt not offend God. For
   thou who art afraid lest thou offend those above thee, see whether
   there be not One above him whom thou art afraid of offending. By all
   means then be loth to offend those above thee. This is an established
   rule with thee. But then is it not plain, that he must on no account be
   offended, who is above all others? Run over now the list of those above
   thee. First are thy father and mother, if they are educating thee
   aright; if they are bringing thee up for Christ; they are to be heard
   in all things, they must be obeyed in every command; let them enjoin
   nothing against one above themselves, and so let them be obeyed. And
   who, thou wilt say, is above him who begat me? He who created thee. For
   man begets, but God creates. How it is that man begets, he does not
   know; and what he shall beget, he does not know. But He who saw thee
   that He might make thee, before that he whom He made existed, is surely
   above thy father. Thy country again should be above thy very parents;
   so that whereinsoever thy parents enjoin aught against thy country,
   they are not to be listened to. And whatsoever thy country enjoin
   against God, it is not to be listened to. For if thou wilt be healed,
   if after the issue of blood, if after twelve years' continuance in that
   disease, if after having spent thine all upon physicians, and not
   having received health, thou dost wish at length to be made whole; O
   woman, whom I am addressing as a figure of the Church, thy father
   enjoineth thee this, and thy people that. But thy Lord saith to thee,
   "Forget thine own people, and thy father's house." [2185] For what
   good? for what advantage? with what useful result? "Because the King
   hath desired thy beauty." He hath desired what He made, since when
   deformed He loved thee, that He might make thee beautiful. For thee
   unbelieving, and deformed, He shed His Blood, and He made thee faithful
   and beauteous, He hath loved His own gifts in thee. For what didst thou
   bring to thy spouse? What didst thou receive for dowry from thy former
   father, and former people? Was it not the excesses [2186] and the rags
   of sins? Thy rags He cast away, thy robe impure [2187] He tore asunder.
   He pitied thee that He might adorn thee. He adorned thee, that He might
   love thee.

   9. What need of more, Brethren. Ye are Christians, and have heard, that
   "If ye sin against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye
   sin against Christ." Do not disregard it, if ye would not be wiped out
   of the book of life. How long shall I go about to speak in bright and
   pleasing terms to you, what my grief forceth me to speak in some sort,
   and will not suffer me to keep secret? Whosoever they are who are
   minded to disregard these things, and sin against Christ, let them only
   consider what they are doing. We wish the rest of the Heathen to be
   gathered in; and ye are stones in their way: they have a wish to come;
   they stumble, and so return. For they say in their hearts, Why should
   we leave the gods whom the very Christians worship as we do? God
   forbid, thou wilt say, that I should worship the gods of the Gentiles.
   I know, I understand, I believe thee. But what account art thou making
   of the consciences of the weak which thou art wounding? What account
   art thou making of their price, if thou disregard the purchase?
   Consider for how great a price was the purchase made. "Through thy
   knowledge," saith the Apostle, "shall the weak brother perish;" that
   knowledge which thou professest to have, in that thou knowest that an
   idol is nothing, and that in thy mind thou art thinking only of God,
   and so sittest down in the idol's temple. In this knowledge the weak
   brother perisheth. And lest thou shouldest pay no regard to the weak
   brother, he added, "for whom Christ died." If thou wouldest disregard
   him, yet consider his Price, and weigh the whole world in the balance
   with the Blood of Christ. And lest thou shouldest still think that thou
   art sinning against a weak brother, and so esteem it after that he had
   heard that he was "Peter," a trivial fault, and of small account, he
   saith, "Ye sin against Christ." For men are in the habit of saying, I
   sin against man; am I sinning against God?" Deny then that Christ is
   God. Dost thou dare deny that Christ is God? Hast thou learned this
   other doctrine, when thou didst sit at meat in the idol's temple? The
   school of Christ doth not admit that doctrine. I ask; Where learnedst
   thou that Christ is not God? The Pagans are wont to say so. Seest thou
   what bad associations [2188] do? Seest thou, "that evil communications
   corrupt good manners?" [2189] There thou canst not speak of the Gospel,
   and thou dost hear others talking of idols. There thou losest the truth
   that Christ is God; and what thou dost drink in there, thou vomitest
   out in the Church. It may be thou art bold enough to speak here; bold
   enough to mutter among the crowds; "Was not then Christ a man? Was He
   not crucified?" This hast thou learned of the Pagans. Thou hast lost
   thy soul's health, thou hast not touched the border. On this point then
   touch again the border, and receive health. As I taught thee to touch
   it in this that is written, "Whoso seeth a brother sit at meat in the
   idol's temple;" [2190] touch it also concerning the Divinity of Christ.
   The same border said of the Jews, "Whose are the fathers, and of whom
   as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for
   ever." [2191] Behold, against Whom, even the Very God, thou dost sin,
   when thou sittest down with false gods.

   10. It is no god, you will say; because it is the tutelary genius of
   Carthage. As though if it were Mars or Mercury, it would be a god. But
   consider in what light it is esteemed by them; not what it is in
   itself. For I know also as well as thou, that it is but a stone. If
   this "genius" be any ornament, let the citizens of Carthage live well;
   and they themselves will be this "genius" of Carthage. But if the
   "genius" be a devil, ye have heard in that same Scripture, "The things
   which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God;
   and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils." [2192] We
   know well that it is no God; would that they knew it too! but because
   of those weak ones who do not know it, their conscience ought not to be
   wounded. It is this that the Apostle warns us of. For that they regard
   that statue as something divine, and take it for a god, the altar is
   witness. What does the altar there, if it be not accounted a god? Let
   no one tell me; it is no deity, it is no God. I have said already,
   "Would that they only knew this, as we all do." But how they regard it,
   for what they take it, and what they do about it, that altar is
   witness. It is convincing against the intentions of all who worship
   there, grant that it may not be convincing also against those who sit
   at meat with them!

   11. Yes, let not Christians press the Church, if the Pagans do. She is
   the Body of Christ. Were we not saying, that the Body of Christ was
   pressed, and not touched. He endured those who pressed Him; and was
   looking out for those who "touched" Him. And, Brethren, I would that if
   the Body of Christ be pressed by Pagans, by whom it is wont to be
   pressed; that at least Christians would not press the Body of Christ.
   Brethren, it is my business to speak to you, my business it is to speak
   to Christians; "For what have I to do to judge them that are without?"
   [2193] the Apostle himself saith. Them we address in another way, as
   being weak. With them we must [2194] deal softly, that they may hear
   the truth; in you the corruption must be cut out. If ye ask whereby the
   Pagans are to be gained over, whereby they are to be illuminated, and
   called to salvation; forsake their solemnities, forsake their trifling
   shows; and then if they do not consent to our truth, let them blush at
   their own scantiness.

   12. If he who is over thee be a good man, he is thy nourisher; if a bad
   man, he is thy tempter. Receive the nourishment in the one case with
   gladness, and in the temptation show thyself approved. Be thou gold.
   Regard this world as the furnace of the goldsmith; in one narrow place
   are there things, gold, chaff, fire. To the two former the fire is
   applied, the chaff is burned, and the gold purified. A man has yielded
   to threats, and been led away to the idol's temple: Alas! I bewail the
   chaff; I see the ashes. Another has not yet yielded to threats nor
   terrors; has been brought before the judge, and stood firm in his
   confession, and has not bent down to the idol image: what does the
   flame with him? Does it not purify the gold? Stand, fast then,
   Brethren, in the Lord; greater in power, is He who hath called you. Be
   not afraid of the threats of the ungodly. Bear with your enemies; in
   them ye have those for whom ye may pray; let them by no means terrify
   you. This is saving health, draw out in this feast here from this
   source; here drink that wherewith ye may be satisfied, and not in those
   other feasts, that only whereby ye may be maddened. Stand fast in the
   Lord. Ye are silver, ye shall be gold. This similitude is not our own,
   it is out of Holy Scripture. Ye have read and heard, "As gold in the
   furnace hath He tried them, and received them as a burnt-offering."
   [2195] See what ye shall be among the treasures of God. Be ye rich as
   touching God, not as if to make Him rich, but as to become rich from
   Him. Let Him replenish you; admit nought else into your heart.

   13. Do we lift up ourselves unto pride, or tell you to be despisers
   against the powers ordained? Not so. Do ye again who are sick on this
   point, touch also that border of the garment? The Apostle himself
   saith, "Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is
   no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God. He then
   who resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God." [2196] But
   what if it enjoin what thou oughtest not to do? In this case by all
   means disregard the power through fear of Power. Consider these several
   grades of human powers. If the magistrate [2197] enjoin anything, must
   it not be done? Yet if his order be in opposition to the Proconsul,
   thou dost not surely despise the power, but choosest to obey a greater
   power. Nor in this case ought the less to be angry, if the greater be
   preferred. Again, if the Proconsul himself enjoin anything, and the
   Emperor another thing, is there any doubt, that disregarding the
   former, we ought to obey the latter? So then if the Emperor enjoin one
   thing, and God another, what judge ye? Pay me tribute, submit thyself
   to my allegiance. Right, but not in an idol's temple. In an idol's
   temple He forbids it. Who forbids it? A greater Power. Pardon me then:
   thou threatenest a prison, He threateneth hell. Here must thou at once
   take to thee thy "faith as a shield, whereby thou mayest be able to
   quench all the fiery darts of the enemy." [2198]

   14. But one of these powers is plotting, and contriving evil designs
   against thee. Well: he is but sharpening the razor wherewith to shave
   the hair, but not to cut the head. Ye have but just now heard this that
   I have said in the Psalm, "Thou hast worked deceit like a sharp razor."
   [2199] Why did He compare the deceit of a wicked man in power to a
   razor? Because it does not reach, save to our superfluous parts. As
   hairs on our body seem as it were superfluous, and are shaven off
   without any loss of the flesh; so whatsoever an angry man in power can
   take from thee, count only among thy superfluities. He takes away thy
   poverty; can he take away thy wealth? Thy poverty is thy wealth in thy
   heart. Thy superfluous things only hath he power to take away, these
   only hath he power to injure, even though he had license given him so
   far as to hurt the body. Yea even this life itself to those whose
   thoughts are of another life, this present life, I say, may be reckoned
   among the things superfluous. For so the Martyrs have despised it. They
   did not lose life, but they gained Life.

   15. Be sure, Brethren, that enemies have no power against the faithful,
   except so far as it profiteth them to be tempted and proved. Of this be
   sure, Brethren, let no one say ought against it. Cast all your care
   upon the Lord, throw yourselves wholly and entirely upon Him. He will
   not withdraw Himself that ye should fall. He who created us, hath given
   us security touching our very hairs. "Verily I say unto you, even the
   hairs of your head are all numbered." [2200] Our hairs are numbered by
   God; how much more is our conduct known to Him to whom our hairs are
   thus known? See then, how that God doth not disregard our least things.
   For if He disregarded them, He would not create them. For He verily
   both created our hairs, and still taketh count of them. But thou wilt
   say, though they are preserved at present, perhaps they will perish. On
   this point also hear His word, "Verily I say unto you, there shall not
   an hair of your head perish." [2201] Why art thou afraid of man, O man,
   whose place is in the Bosom of God? Fall not out of His Bosom;
   whatsoever thou shall suffer there, will avail to thy salvation, not to
   thy destruction. Martyrs have endured the tearing of their limbs, and
   shall Christians fear the injuries of Christian times? He who would do
   thee an injury now, can only do it in fear. He does not say openly,
   come to the idol-feast; he does not say openly, come to my altars, and
   banquet there. And if he should say so, and thou wast to refuse, let
   him make a complaint of it, let him bring it as an accusation and
   charge against thee: "He would not come to my altars, he would not come
   to my temple, where I worship." Let him say this. He does not dare; but
   in his guile he contrives another attack. Make ready thy hair; he is
   sharpening the razor; he is about to take off thy superfluous things,
   to shave what thou must soon leave behind thee. Let him take off what
   shall endure, if he can. This powerful enemy, what has he taken away?
   what great thing has he taken away? That which a thief or housebreaker
   could take: in his utmost rage, he can but take what a robber can. Even
   if he should have license given him to the slaying of the very body,
   what does he take away, but what the robber can take? I did him too
   much honour, when I said, "a robber." For be the robber who and what he
   may, he is a man. He takes from thee what a fever, or an adder, or a
   poisonous mushroom can take. Here lies the whole power of the rage of
   men, to do what a mushroom can! Men eat a poisonous mushroom, and they
   die. Lo! in what frail estate is the life of man; which sooner or later
   thou must abandon; do not struggle then in such wise for it, as that
   thou shouldest be abandoned thyself.

   16. Christ is our Life; think then of Christ. He came to suffer, but
   also to be glorified; to be despised, but to be exalted also; to die;
   but also to rise again. If the labour alarm thee, see its reward. Why
   dost thou wish to arrive by softness at that to which nothing but hard
   labour can lead? Now thou art afraid, lest thou shouldest lose thy
   money; because thou earnest thy money with great labour. If thou didst
   not attain to thy money, which thou must some time or other lose, at
   all events when thou diest, without labour, wouldest thou desire
   without labour to attain to the Life eternal? Let that be of higher
   value in thine eyes, to which after all thy labours thou shalt in such
   sort attain as never more to lose it. If this money, to which thou hast
   attained after all thy labours on such condition as that thou must some
   time lose it, be of high value with thee; how much more ought we to
   long after those things which are everlasting!

   17. Give no credit to their words, neither be afraid of them. They say
   that we are enemies of their idols. May God so grant, and give all into
   our power, as He hath already given us that which we have broken down.
   For this I say, Beloved, that ye may not attempt to do it, when it is
   not lawfully in your power to do it; for it is the way of ill-regulated
   men, and the mad Circumcelliones, [2202] both to be violent when they
   have no power, and to be ever eager in their wishes to die without a
   cause. Ye heard what we read to you, all of you who were present in the
   Mappalia. [2203] "When the land shall have been given into your power"
   (he saith first, "into your power," and so enjoined what was to be
   done); "then," saith he, "ye shall destroy their altars, and break in
   pieces their groves, and hew down all their images." [2204] When we
   shall have got the power, do this. When the power has not been given
   us, we do not do it; when it is given, we do not neglect it. Many
   Pagans have these abominations on their own estates; do we go and break
   them in pieces? No, for our first efforts are that the idols in their
   hearts should be broken down. When they too are made Christians
   themselves, they either invite us to so good a work, or anticipate us.
   At present we must pray for them, not be angry with them. If very
   painful feelings excite us, it is rather against Christians, it is
   against our brethren, who will enter into the Church in such a mind, as
   to have their body there, and their heart anywhere else. The whole
   ought to be within. If that which man seeth is within, why is that
   which God seeth without?

   18. Now ye may know, Dearly Beloved, that these unite their murmurings
   with Heretics and with Jews. Heretics, Jews, and Heathens have made a
   unity against Unity. Because it has happened, that in some places the
   Jews have received chastisement because of their wickednesses; they
   charge and suspect us, or pretend, that we are always seeking the like
   treatment for them. Again, because it has happened that the heretics
   [2205] in some places have suffered the penalty of the laws for the
   impiety and fury of their deeds of violence; they say immediately that
   we are seeking by every means some harm for their destruction. Again,
   because it has been resolved that laws should be passed against the
   Heathen, yea for them rather, if they were only wise. (For as when
   silly boys are playing with the mud, and dirtying their hands, the
   strict master comes, shakes the mud out of their hands, and holds out
   their book; so has it pleased God by the hands of princes His subjects
   to alarm their childish, foolish hearts, that they may throw away the
   dirt from their hands, and set about something useful. And what is this
   something useful with the hands, but, "Break thy bread to the hungry,
   and bring the houseless poor into thy house"? [2206] But nevertheless
   these children escape from their master's sight, and return stealthily
   to their mud, and when they are discovered they hide their hands that
   they may not be seen.) Because then it has so pleased God, they think
   that we are looking out for the idols everywhere, and that we break
   them down in all places where we have discovered them. How so? Are
   there not places before our very eyes in which they are? Or are we
   indeed ignorant where they are? And yet we do not break them down,
   because God has not given them into our power. When does God give them
   into our power? When the masters of these things shall become
   Christians. The master of a certain place has just lately wished this
   to be done. If he had not been minded to give the place itself to the
   Church, and only had given orders that there should be no idols on his
   property; I think that it ought to have been executed with the greatest
   devotion, that the soul of the absent Christian brother, who wishes on
   his land to return thanks to God, and would not that there should be
   anything there to God's dishonour, might be assisted by his
   fellow-Christians. Added to this, that in this case he gave the place
   itself to the Church. And shall there be idols in the Church's estate?
   Brethren, see then what it is that displeases the Heathens. It is but a
   little matter with them that we do not take them away from their
   estates, that we do not break them down: they would have them kept up
   even in our own places. We preach against idols, we take them away from
   the hearts of men; we are persecutors of idols; we openly profess it.
   Are we then to be the preservers of them? I do not touch them when I
   have not the power; I do not touch them when the lord of the property
   complains of it; but when he wishes it to be done, and gives thanks for
   it, I should incur guilt if I did it not.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2163] Matt. viii. 8.

   [2164] Luke vii. 36.

   [2165] Luke ix. 58.

   [2166] Luke ix. 57.

   [2167] Matt. viii. 20.

   [2168] Luke ix. 59.

   [2169] Luke xix. 6.

   [2170] Matt. viii. 8.

   [2171] Matt. viii. 10.

   [2172] Matt. viii. 9.

   [2173] Ps. xvii. 44, 45, Sept. (xviii. 43, 44, English version).

   [2174] Luke viii. 45.

   [2175] Col. i. 24.

   [2176] 1 Cor. xii. 27.

   [2177] Matt. viii. 11.

   [2178] Potus.

   [2179] Præsentato.

   [2180] 1 Cor. xv. 9.

   [2181] Salute.

   [2182] 1 Cor. iv. 11.

   [2183] 1 Cor. viii. 10, 11.

   [2184] 1 Cor. viii. 12.

   [2185] Ps. xlv. 10.

   [2186] Luxurias.

   [2187] Cilicium.

   [2188] Mensæ.

   [2189] 1 Cor. xv. 33.

   [2190] 1 Cor. viii. 10.

   [2191] Rom. ix. 5.

   [2192] 1 Cor. x. 20.

   [2193] 1 Cor. v. 12.

   [2194] Blandiendum.

   [2195] Wisd. iii. 6.

   [2196] Rom. xiii. 1, 2.

   [2197] Curator.

   [2198] Eph. vi. 16.

   [2199] Ps. li. 4, Sept. (lii. 2, English version).

   [2200] Matt. x. 30.

   [2201] Luke xxi. 18.

   [2202] By the Donatists called Agonistici (St. Augustin, In Ps. 133.
   6), and by the Catholics Circilliones, or Circumcelliones, that is,
   Vagrants. Circumcelliones dicti sunt, quia circum cellas vagantur,
   solent enim ire hac illac nusquam habentes pedes (In Ps. 132. 3). They
   were of a very licentious and abandoned character, and in their
   fanaticism they would often commit suicide, to which the text may
   suppose to refer (Lib. de Hæres. c. 69; Brev. Coll. cum Donat. viii.
   [14]). They exercised extreme cruelty against the Catholics (Cont.
   Cresc. Don. lib. 3, xliii. [47], xlvi. [50]). Their form of salutation
   was Deo laudes (Cont. lit. Petil. lib. 2, lxv. [146]), which St.
   Augustin (In Ps. 133, 6) says was more feared than the roaring of a
   lion. For the time of their origin see Opt. lib. 3.

   [2203] A place where St. Cyprian's body was buried outside the walls of
   Carthage. Macrius in his Hierolexicon (ad verb) thinks it ought to be
   written Mapalia, i.e. domus rurales.

   [2204] Deut. vii. 1 and xii. 3.

   [2205] This refers doubtless to the laws against the Donatists. The
   Emperor Honorius issued an edict against them A.D. 405, and another
   A.D. 410, and A.D. 412, and again A.D 414, on occasion of the death of
   Marcellinus, and to prevent any advantage which the Donatists might
   derive from his death. For he had been judge in the conference between
   the Catholics and Donatists, granted by the Emperor at the request of
   the deputies of the council of Carthage, four years before (Fleury, H.
   E. B. xxii., cxxvi.): and to him had been entrusted the execution of
   the laws issued against the Donatists for the maintenance of the
   Catholic religion.

   [2206] Isa. lviii. 7.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XIII.

   [LXIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. viii. 23, "And when he was entered
   into a boat," etc.

   1. By the Lord's blessing, I will address you upon the lesson of the
   Holy Gospel which has just been read, and take occasion thereby to
   exhort you, that against the tempest and waves of this world, faith
   sleep not in your hearts. "For the Lord Christ had not indeed death nor
   sleep in His power, and peradventure sleep overcame the Almighty One as
   He was sailing against His will?" If ye believe this, He is asleep in
   you; but if Christ be awake in you, your faith is awake. The Apostle
   saith, "that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith." [2207] This
   sleep then of Christ is a sign of a high mystery. [2208] The sailors
   are the souls passing over the world in wood. That ship also was a
   figure of the Church. And all, individually indeed are temples of God,
   and his own heart is the vessel in which each sails; nor can he suffer
   shipwreck, if his thoughts are only good.

   2. Thou hast heard an insult, it is the wind; thou art angry, it is a
   wave. When therefore the wind blows, and the wave swells, the ship is
   endangered, the heart is in jeopardy, the heart is tossed to and fro.
   When thou hast heard an insult, thou longest to be avenged; and, lo,
   avenged thou hast been, and so rejoicing in another's harm thou hast
   suffered shipwreck. And why is this? Because Christ is asleep in thee.
   What does this mean, Christ is asleep in thee? Thou hast forgotten
   Christ. Rouse Him up then, call Christ to mind, let Christ awake in
   thee, give heed to Him. What didst thou wish? To be avenged. Hast thou
   forgotten, that when He was being crucified, He said, "Father, forgive
   them, for they know not what they do?" [2209] He who was asleep in thy
   heart did not wish to be avenged. Awake Him up then, call Him to
   remembrance. The remembrance of Him is His word; the remembrance of Him
   is His command. And then wilt thou say if Christ, awake in thee, What
   manner of man am I, who wish to be avenged! Who am I, who deal out
   threatenings against another man? I may die perhaps before I am
   avenged. And when at my last breath, inflamed with rage, and thirsting
   for vengeance, I shall depart out of this body, He will not receive me,
   who did not wish to be avenged; He will not receive me, who said,
   "Give, and it shall be given unto you; forgive, and it shall be
   forgiven you." [2210] Therefore will I refrain myself from my wrath,
   and return to the repose of my heart. Christ hath commanded the sea,
   tranquillity is restored.

   3. Now what I have said as to anger, hold fast as a rule in all your
   temptations. A temptation has sprung up; it is the wind; thou art
   disturbed; it is a wave. Awake up Christ then, let Him speak with thee.
   "Who is this, since the winds and the sea obey Him?" [2211] Who is
   this, whom the sea obeyeth? "The sea is His, and He made it." [2212]
   "All things were made by Him." [2213] Imitate the winds then, and the
   sea rather; obey the Creator. At Christ's command the sea giveth ear;
   and art thou deaf? The sea heareth, and the wind ceaseth: and dost thou
   still blow on? What! I say, I do, I devise; what is all this, but to be
   blowing on, and to be unwilling to stop in obedience to the word of
   Christ? Let not the wave master you in this troubled state of your
   heart. Yet since we are but men, if the wind should drive us on, and
   stir up the affections of our souls, let us not despair; let us awake
   Christ, that we may sail on a tranquil sea, and so come to our country.
   "Let us [2214] turn to the Lord," etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2207] Eph. iii. 17.

   [2208] Sacramenti.

   [2209] Luke xxiii. 34.

   [2210] Luke vi. 37, 38.

   [2211] Matt. viii. 27.

   [2212] Ps. xcv. 5.

   [2213] John i. 3.

   [2214] For the the full form, see end of Sermon xvii. (lxvii. Bened.).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XIV.

   [LXIV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. x. 16, "Behold, I send you forth as
   sheep in the midst of wolves," etc. Delivered on a Festival of Martyrs.

   1. When the Holy Gospel was read, Brethren, ye heard how our Lord Jesus
   Christ strengthened His Martyrs by His teaching, saying, "Behold, I
   send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves." [2215] Now consider,
   my Brethren, what he does. If but one wolf come among many sheep, be
   they ever so many thousands, they will all be put to confusion by one
   wolf in the midst of them: and though all may not be torn, yet all are
   frightened. What manner of design is this then, what manner of counsel,
   what manner of power, not to let in a wolf amongst the sheep, but to
   send the sheep against the wolves! "I send you," saith He, "as sheep in
   the midst of wolves;" not to the neighbourhood of wolves, but "in the
   midst of wolves." There was then at that time a herd of wolves, and but
   few sheep. For when the many wolves killed the few sheep, the wolves
   were changed and became sheep.

   2. Let us hear then what advice He hath given, who hath promised the
   crown, but hath first appointed the combat; who is a spectator of the
   combatants, and assisteth them in their toil. What manner of conflict
   hath He prescribed? "Be ye," saith He, "wise as serpents, and simple as
   doves." [2216] Whoso understandeth, and holdeth to this, may die in
   assurance [2217] that he will not really die. For no one ought to die
   in this assurance, but he who knows that he shall in such sort die, as
   that death only shall die in him, and life be crowned.

   3. Wherefore, Beloved, I must explain to you, though I have often
   spoken already on this subject, what it is to be "simple as doves, and
   wise as serpents." Now if the simplicity of doves be enjoined us, what
   hath the wisdom of the serpent to do in the simplicity of the dove?
   This in the dove I love, that she has no gall; this I fear in the
   serpent, that he has poison. But now do not fear the serpent
   altogether; something he has for thee to hate, and something for thee
   to imitate. For when the serpent is weighed down with age, and he feels
   the burden of his many years, he contracts and forces himself into a
   hole, and lays aside his old coat [2218] of skin, that he may spring
   forth into new life. Imitate him in this, thou Christian, who dost hear
   Christ saying, "Enter ye in at the strait gate." [2219] And the Apostle
   Paul saith to thee, "Put ye off the old man with his deeds, and put ye
   on the new man." [2220] Thou hast then something to imitate in the
   serpent. Die not for the "old man," but for the truth. Whoso dies for
   any temporal good dies "for the old man." But when thou hast stripped
   thyself of all "that old man," thou hast imitated the wisdom of the
   serpent. Imitate him in this again; "keep thy head safe." And what does
   this mean, keep thy head safe? Keep Christ with thee. Have not some of
   you, it may be, observed, on occasions when you have wished to kill an
   adder, how to save his head, he will expose his whole body to the
   strokes of his assailant? He would not that that part of him should be
   struck, where he knows that his life resides. And our Life is Christ,
   for He hath said Himself, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life."
   [2221] Here the Apostle also; "The Head of the man is Christ." [2222]
   Whoso then keepeth Christ in him, keepeth his head for his protection.

   4. Now what need is there to commend to you in many words the
   simplicity of the dove? For the serpent's poison had need to be guarded
   against: there, there was a danger in imitation; there, there was
   something to be feared; but the dove may you imitate securely. Mark how
   the doves rejoice in society; everywhere do they fly and feed together;
   they do not love to be alone, they delight in communion, they preserve
   affection; their cooings are the plaintive cries [2223] of love, with
   kissings they beget their young. Yea even when doves, as we have often
   noticed, dispute about their holes, it is as it were but a peaceful
   strife. Do they separate, because of their contentions? Nay, still do
   they fly and feed together, and their very strife is peaceful. See this
   strife of doves, in what the Apostle saith, "If any man obey not our
   word by this epistle, mark that man, and have no company with him."
   Behold the strife; but observe now how it is the strife of doves, not
   of wolves. He subjoined immediately, "Yet count him not as an enemy,
   but admonish him as a brother." [2224] The dove loves even when she is
   in strife; and the wolf even when he caresses, hates. Therefore having
   the simplicity of doves, and the wisdom of serpents, celebrate the
   solemnities of the Martyrs in sobriety of mind, [2225] not [2226] in
   bodily excess, sing lauds to God. For He who is the Martyrs' God, is
   our Lord God also, He it is who will crown us. If we shall have
   wrestled well, we shall be crowned by Him, who hath crowned already
   those whom we desire to imitate.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2215] Matt. x. 16.

   [2216] Matt. x. 16.

   [2217] Securus.

   [2218] Tunicam.

   [2219] Matt. vii. 13.

   [2220] Col. iii. 9; Eph. iv. 22-24.

   [2221] John xiv. 6.

   [2222] 1 Cor. xi. 3.

   [2223] Gemitibus amoris murmurant.

   [2224] 2 Thess. iii. 14, 15.

   [2225] See, as to the excesses which prevailed at the festivals of the
   Martyrs, a letter of St. Augustin to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage and
   Primate of Africa (Ep. 22, al. 64), urging him to use his authority to
   suppress them. St Ambrose had prohibited these feasts in the Church of
   Milan (Augustin, Conf. lib. 6. 2 [Am. edition i. 90, note]). Aurelius
   succeeded in getting a canon (xxx.) made in the third Council of
   Carthage (A.D. 397), obliging the clergy to abstain from all such
   feasts in the Church, and as far as in them lay to restrain the people
   from the same practice (Conc. Labbe, t. 2, p. 1171; Bingham, B. xx.
   vii. § 10).

   [2226] Ebrietate ventris.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XV.

   [LXV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. x. 28, "Be not afraid of them that
   kill the body." Delivered on a Festival of Martyrs.

   1. The Divine oracles which have just been read teach us in fearing not
   to fear, and in not fearing to fear. Ye observed when the Holy Gospel
   was being read, that our Lord God before He died for us, would have us
   to be firm; and this by admonishing us "not" to fear, and withal to
   fear. For he said, "Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able
   to kill the soul." See where He advised us not to fear. See now where
   He advised us to fear. "But," saith he, "fear Him who hath power to
   destroy both body and soul in hell." [2227] Let us fear therefore, that
   we may not fear. Fear seems to be allied to cowardice: seems to be the
   character of the weak, not the strong. But see what saith the
   Scripture, "The fear of the Lord is the hope of strength." [2228] Let
   us then fear, that we may not fear; that is, let us fear prudently,
   that we may not fear vainly. The holy Martyrs on the occasion of whose
   solemnity this lesson was read out of the Gospel, in fearing, feared
   not; because in fearing God, they did not regard men.

   2. For what need a man fear from man? And what is that whereby one man
   should cause another fear, since both of them are men? One threatens
   and says, "I will kill thee;" and does not fear, lest after his threat
   he die before he have fulfilled it. "I will kill thee," he says. Who
   says it, and to whom? I hear two men, the one threatening, and the
   other alarmed: of whom the one is powerful, and the other weak, yet
   both are mortal. Why then does he so stretch out himself, he, in
   honour, a somewhat more inflated power, in body, equal weakness? Let
   him securely threaten death who does not fear death. But if he fear
   that whereby he causes fear; let him think of himself, and compare
   himself with him whom he is threatening. Let him see in him whom he
   threateneth a likeness of condition, and so together with him let him
   seek like pity from the Lord. For he is but a man, and he threatens
   another man, a creature, another creature; only the one puffed up under
   his Creator's eye, and the other fleeing for refuge to the same
   Creator.

   3. Let the stout Martyr then, as he stands a man before another man,
   say; "I do not fear, because I fear." Thou canst not do what thou art
   threatening, unless He will; but what He threateneth, none can hinder
   Him from doing. And then again, what dost thou threaten, and what canst
   thou do, if thou art permitted? Thy violence extends but to the flesh,
   the soul is safe from thee. Thou canst not kill what thou dost not see:
   visible thyself, thou threatenest that which is visible in me. But we
   have both an invisible Creator, whom we ought both to fear; who of that
   which was both visible and invisible created man. He made Him visible
   out of the earth, and with His Breath He breathed into Him an invisible
   Spirit. Therefore the invisible substance, that is, the soul, which has
   raised from the earth the earth as it lay, does not fear, when thou
   assaultest the earth. Thou canst strike the habitation, but canst thou
   strike him who dwells there? When the chain is broken, he escapes who
   before was bound, and he will now be crowned in secret. Why then dost
   thou threaten me, who canst do nothing to my soul? Through the desert
   of that to which thou canst do nothing, will that to which thy power
   extends rise again. For through the soul's desert, will the flesh also
   rise again; and will be restored to its inhabitant, now no more to
   fail, but to endure for ever. Behold (I am using the words of a
   Martyr), behold, I say, not even on account of my body do I fear thy
   threats. My body indeed is subject to thy power; but even the hairs of
   my head are numbered by my Creator. Why should I fear lest I lose my
   body, who cannot even lose a hair? How shall he not have a care of my
   body, to whom my meanest things are so well known? This body which may
   be wounded and slain will for a time be ashes, but it will be for ever
   immortal. But to whom shall this be? To whom shall the body be restored
   for life eternal, even though it have been slain, destroyed, and
   scattered to the winds? to whom shall it be so restored? To him who has
   not been afraid to lay down his own life, since he does not fear, lest
   his body should be slain.

   4. For, Brethren, the soul is said to be immortal, and immortal it is
   according to a certain manner of its own: for it is a kind of life
   which is able to give life to the body by its presence. For by the soul
   doth the body live. This life cannot die, and therefore is the soul
   immortal. Why then said I according to a certain manner of its own?
   Hear why. Because there is a true immortality, an immortality which is
   an entire unchangeableness; of which the Apostle saith, speaking of
   God, "Who only hath immortality, dwelling in that light which no man
   may approach unto, whom no man hath seen, nor can see, to whom be
   honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen." [2229] If then God only hath
   immortality, the soul must needs be mortal. See then why it was that I
   said that the soul is immortal after a certain manner of its own. For
   in fact it may also die. Understand this, Beloved, and there will
   remain no difficulty. I venture to say then that the soul can die, can
   be slain also. Yet it is undoubtedly immortal. See, I venture to say,
   it is at once immortal, and it may be slain; and therefore I said that
   there is a kind of immortality, an entire unchangeableness, that is,
   which God Only hath, of whom it is said, "Who Only hath immortality;"
   for if the soul cannot be slain, how did the Lord Himself say, when He
   would make us fear, "Fear Him who hath power to slay both body and soul
   in hell"?

   5. Hitherto I have confirmed, not solved, the difficulty. I have proved
   that the soul can be slain. The Gospel cannot be gainsaid but by the
   ungodly soul. Lo, something occurs to me here, and comes into my mind
   to speak. Life cannot be gainsaid, but by a dead soul. The Gospel is
   life, impiety and infidelity are the death of the soul. See then, it
   can die, and yet it is immortal. How then is it immortal? Because there
   is always a sort of life which is never extinguished in it. And how
   does it die? Not in ceasing to be life, but by losing its life. For the
   soul is both life to something else, and it has its own proper life.
   Consider the order of the creatures. The soul is the life of the body:
   God is the life of the soul. As the life, that is the soul, is present
   with the body, that the body die not; so ought the life of the soul,
   that is God, to be with it that the soul die not. How does the body
   die? By the soul's leaving it. I say, by the soul's leaving it the body
   dies; and it lies along a mere carcass, what was a little before a
   desirable, now a contemptible, object. There are in it still its
   several members, the eyes, and ears; but these are but the windows of
   the house, its inhabitant is gone. They who bewail the dead, cry in
   vain at the windows of the house; there is none within to hear. How
   many things does the fond affection of the mourner give utterance to,
   how many enumerate and call to mind; and with what a madness of sorrow,
   so to say, does he speak, as with one who was sensible of what was
   doing, when he is really speaking with one who is no longer there? He
   recounts his good qualities, and the tokens of his goodness towards
   himself. It was thou that didst give me this; and did this and that for
   me; it was thou who didst thus and thus dearly love me. But if thou
   wouldest only consider and understand, and restrain the madness of thy
   grief, he who once loved thee, is gone; in vain does the house receive
   thy knockings, in which thou canst not find a dweller.

   6. Let us return to the subject I was speaking of a little while since.
   The body is dead. Why? Because its life, that is the soul, is gone.
   Again, the body is alive, and the man is impious, unbelieving, hard of
   belief, incorrigible; in this case whilst the body is alive, the soul
   by which the body lives is dead. For the soul is so excellent a thing,
   that it has power even though dead to give life to the body. So
   excellent a thing, I say, is the soul, so excellent a creature, that
   even though dead itself, it has power to quicken the body. For the soul
   of the impious, unbelieving, unregulated man is dead, and yet by it
   though dead the body lives. And therefore is it in the body; it sets on
   the hands to work, and the feet to walk; it directs the eye to see, it
   disposes the ears to hear, it discriminates tastes, avoids pains, seeks
   after pleasures. All these are tokens of the life of the body; but they
   are from the presence of the soul. If I were to ask a body whether it
   were alive; it would answer me, You see me walking, you see me working,
   you hear me talking, you perceive that I have certain aims and
   aversions, and do you not understand that the body is alive? By these
   works then of the soul which is placed within, I understand that the
   body is alive. I ask the soul also whether it is alive? It also has its
   proper works, by which it manifests its life. The feet walk. I
   understand by this that the body lives, but by the presence of the
   soul. I ask now, does the soul live? These feet walk. (To speak only of
   this one movement.) I am questioning both body and soul, as touching
   their life. The feet walk, I understand that the body lives. But
   whither do they walk? To adultery, it is said. Then is the soul dead.
   For so hath unerring Scripture said, "The widow who liveth in pleasure
   is dead." [2230] Now since the difference is great between "pleasure"
   and adultery, how can the soul which is said to be dead in pleasure,
   live in adultery? It is surely dead. But it is dead even though it be
   not in this case. I hear a man speaking; the body then lives. For the
   tongue could not move itself in the mouth, and by its several motions
   give utterance to articulate sounds, were there not an inhabitant
   within; and a musician as it were to this instrument, to make use of
   his tongue. I understand it perfectly. Thus the body speaks; the body
   then lives. But I ask, is the soul alive also? Lo, the body speaks, and
   so is alive. But what does it speak? As I said concerning the feet;
   they walk, and so the body is alive, and I then asked, whither do they
   walk? that I might understand whether the soul was alive also. So also
   when I hear a man speak, I understand that the body is alive; I ask
   what does he speak, that I may know whether the soul is alive also. He
   speaks a lie. If so, then is the soul dead. How do we prove this? Let
   us ask the truth itself, which saith, "The mouth that lieth, slayeth
   the soul." [2231] I ask, why is the soul dead? I ask as I did just now,
   why is the body dead? Because the soul, its life, was gone. Why is the
   soul dead? Because God, its life, hath forsaken it.

   7. After this brief examination then, know and hold for certain that
   the body is dead without the soul, and that the soul is dead without
   God. Every man without God hath a dead soul. Thou dost bewail the dead:
   bewail the sinner rather, bewail rather the ungodly man, bewail the
   unbeliever. It is written, "The mourning for the dead is seven days;
   for a fool and an ungodly man all the days of his life." [2232] What!
   are there no bowels of Christian compassion in thee; that thou mournest
   for a body from which the soul is gone, and mournest not for the soul,
   from which God is departed? Let the Martyr remembering this make answer
   to him that threatens him, "Why dost thou force me to deny Christ?"
   Wouldest thou then force me to deny the truth? And if I will not, what
   wilt thou do? Thou wilt assault my body, that my soul shall depart from
   it; but this same soul of mine has its body only for the soul's sake.
   It is not so foolish or unwise. Thou wouldest wound my body; but
   wouldest thou, that through fear lest thou shouldest wound my body, and
   my soul should depart from it, I should wound mine own soul, and my God
   should depart from it? Fear not then, O Martyr, the sword of thy
   executioner; fear only thine own tongue, lest thou do execution upon
   thine own self, and slay, not thy body, but thy soul. Fear for thy
   soul, lest it die in hell-fire.

   8. Therefore said the Lord, "Who hath power to slay both body and soul
   in hell-fire." How? when the ungodly shall be cast into hell-fire, will
   his body and his soul burn there? Everlasting punishment will be the
   death of the body; the absence of God will be the death of the soul.
   Wouldest thou know what the death of the soul is? Understand the
   Prophet who saith, "Let the ungodly be taken away, that he may not see
   the glory of the Lord." [2233] Let the soul then fear its proper death,
   and not fear the death of its body. Because if it fear its own death,
   and so live in its God, by not offending and thrusting Him away from
   him, it will be found worthy [2234] to receive its body again at the
   end; not unto everlasting punishment, as the ungodly, but unto life
   eternal, as the righteous. By fearing this death, and loving that life,
   did the Martyrs, in hope of the promises of God, and in contempt of the
   threats of persecutors, attain [2235] themselves to be crowned with
   God, and have left to us the celebration of these solemnities.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2227] Matt. x. 28.

   [2228] Prov. xiv. 26, Sept.

   [2229] 1 Tim. vi. 16.

   [2230] 1 Tim. v. 6.

   [2231] Wisd. i. 11.

   [2232] Ecclus. xxii. 12.

   [2233] Isa. xxvi. 10, Sept.

   [2234] Merebitur.

   [2235] Meruerunt.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XVI.

   [LXVI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xi. 2, "Now when John heard in the
   prison the works of the Christ, he sent by his disciples, and said unto
   him, art thou He that cometh, or look we for another?" etc.

   1. The lesson of the Holy Gospel has set before us a question touching
   John the Baptist. May the Lord assist me to resolve it to you, as He
   hath resolved it to us. John was commended, as ye have heard, by the
   testimony of Christ, and in such terms commended, as that there had not
   risen a greater among those who were born of women. But a greater than
   he had been born of a Virgin. How much greater? Let the herald himself
   declare, how great the difference is between himself and his Judge,
   whose herald he is. For John went before Christ both in his birth and
   preaching; but it was in obedience that he went before Him; not in
   preferring himself before Him. For so the whole train [2236] of
   attendants walks before the judge; yet they who walk before, are really
   after him. How signal a testimony then did John give to Christ? Even to
   saying that he "was not worthy to loose the latchet of His shoes."
   [2237] And what more? "Of His fulness," saith he, "have all we
   received." [2238] He confessed that he was but a lamp lighted at His
   Light, and so he took refuge at His feet, lest venturing on high, he
   should be extinguished by the wind of pride. So great indeed was he,
   that he was taken for Christ; and if he had not himself testified that
   he was not He, the mistake would have continued, and he would have been
   reputed to be the Christ. What striking humility! Honour was proffered
   him by the people, and he himself refused it. Men were at fault in his
   greatness, and he humbled himself. He had no wish to increase by the
   words of men, seeing he had comprehended the Word of God.

   2. This then did John say concerning Christ. And what said Christ of
   John? We have just now heard. "He began to say to the multitudes
   concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed
   shaken with the wind?" [2239] Surely not; for John was not "blown about
   by every wind of doctrine." [2240] "But what went ye out for to see? A
   man clothed in soft raiment?" [2241] No, for John was clothed in rough
   apparel; he had his raiment of camel's hair, not of down. "But what
   went ye out for to see? A Prophet? yea, and more than a Prophet."
   [2242] Why "more than a Prophet"? The Prophets foretold that the Lord
   would come, whom they desired to see, and saw not; but to him was
   vouchsafed what they sought. John saw the Lord; he saw Him, pointed his
   finger toward Him, and said, "Behold the Lamb of God, who taketh away
   the sins of the world;" [2243] behold, here He is. Now had He come and
   was not acknowledged; and so a mistake was made also as to John
   himself. Behold then here is He whom the Patriarchs desired to see,
   whom the Prophets foretold, whom the Law prefigured. "Behold the Lamb
   of God, who taketh away the sins of the world." And he gave a goodly
   testimony to the Lord, and the Lord to him. "Among them that are born
   of women," saith the Lord, "there hath not risen a greater than John
   the Baptist: notwithstanding, he that is less in the kingdom of heaven
   is greater than he;" [2244] less in time, but greater in majesty. This
   He said, meaning Himself to be understood. Now exceedingly great among
   men is John the Baptist, than whom among men Christ alone is greater.
   It may also [2245] be thus stated and explained, "Among them that are
   born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist:
   notwithstanding, he that is the least in the kingdom of heaven is
   greater than he." Not in the sense that I have before explained it.
   "Notwithstanding, he that is the least in the kingdom of heaven is
   greater than he;" the kingdom of heaven he meant where the Angels are;
   he then that is the least among the Angels, is greater than John. Thus
   He set forth to us the excellence [2246] of that kingdom which we
   should long for; set before us a city, of which we should desire to be
   citizens. What sort of citizens are there? how great are they! Whoso is
   the least there, is greater than John. Than what John? "Than whom there
   hath not risen a greater among them that are born of women."

   3. Thus have we heard the true and good record both of John concerning
   Christ, and of Christ concerning John. What then is the meaning of
   this; that John sent his disciples to Him when He was shut up in
   prison, on the eve of being put to death, and said to them, "Go, say to
   Him, Art Thou He that should come, or do we look for another?" [2247]
   Is this then all that praise? That praise is it turned to doubting?
   What sayest thou, John. To Whom art thou speaking? What sayest thou?
   Thou speakest to thy Judge, thyself the herald. Thou stretchedst out
   the finger, and pointedst Him out; thou saidst, "Behold the Lamb of
   God, behold Him who taketh away the sins of the world." Thou saidst,
   "Of His fulness have we all received." Thou saidst, "I am not worthy to
   unloose the latchet of His shoes." And dost thou now say, "Art Thou He
   that should come, or do we look for another?" Is not this the same
   Christ? And who art thou? Art thou not His forerunner? Art thou not he
   of whom it was foretold, "Behold, I send my messenger before Thy face,
   who shall prepare Thy way before thee?" [2248] How dost thou prepare
   the way, and thou art thyself straying from the way? So then the
   disciples of John came; and the Lord said to them, "Go, tell John, the
   blind see, the deaf hear, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the
   poor have the Gospel preached to them; and blessed is he whosoever
   shall not be offended in Me." [2249] Do not suspect that John was
   offended in Christ. And yet his words do sound so; "Art Thou He that
   should come?" Ask my works; "The blind see, the deaf hear, the lame
   walk, the lepers are cleansed, the dead are raised, the poor have the
   Gospel preached to them;" and dost thou ask whether I am He? My works,
   saith He, are My words. "Go, show him again. And as they departed."
   Lest haply any one should say, John was good at first, and the Spirit
   of God forsook him; therefore after their departure, he spake these
   words; after their departure whom John had sent, Christ commended John.
   [2250]

   4. What is the meaning then of this obscure question? May that Sun
   shine upon us, from which that lamp derived its flame. And so the
   resolution of it is altogether plain. John had separate disciples of
   his own; not as in separation from Christ, but prepared as a witness to
   him. For meet it was that such an one should give his testimony to
   Christ, who was himself also gathering disciples, and who might have
   been envious of Him, for that he could not see Him. Therefore because
   John's disciples highly esteemed their master, they heard from John his
   record concerning Christ, and marvelled; and as he was about to die, it
   was his wish that they should be confirmed by him. For no doubt they
   were saying among themselves; Such great things doth he say of Him, but
   none such of himself. "Go then, ask Him;" not because I doubt, but that
   ye may be instructed. "Go, ask Him," hear from Himself what I am in the
   habit of telling you; ye have heard the herald, be confirmed by the
   Judge. "Go, ask Him, Art Thou He that should come, or do we look for
   another?" They went accordingly and asked; not for John's sake, but for
   their own. And for their sakes did Christ say, "The blind see, the lame
   walk, the deaf hear, the lepers are cleansed, the dead are raised, the
   poor have the Gospel preached to them." Ye see Me, acknowledge Me then;
   ye see the works, acknowledge the Doer. "And blessed is he whosoever
   shall not be offended in Me." But it is of you I speak, not of John.
   For that we might know that He spake not this of John, as they
   departed, "He began to speak to the multitudes concerning John;" the
   True, the Truth Himself, proclaimed his true praises.

   5. I think this question has been sufficiently explained. Let it
   suffice then to have prolonged my address thus far. Now keep the poor
   in mind. Give, ye who have not given hitherto; believe me, ye will not
   lose it. Yes, truly, that only it seems ye lose, which ye do not carry
   to the circus. [2251] Now must we render unto the poor the offerings of
   such of you as have offered anything, and the amount which we have is
   much less than your usual offerings. Shake off this sloth. I am become
   a beggar for beggars; what is that to me? I would be a beggar for
   beggars, that ye may be reckoned among the number of children.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2236] Officium.

   [2237] John i. 27.

   [2238] John i. 16.

   [2239] Matt. xi. 7.

   [2240] Eph. iv. 14.

   [2241] Matt. xi. 8.

   [2242] Matt. xi. 9.

   [2243] John i. 29.

   [2244] Matt. xi. 11.

   [2245] He gives these two interpretations of this passage; again Cont.
   adv. leg. and Prop. ii. 5 (20).

   [2246] Commendavit.

   [2247] Matt. xi. 3.

   [2248] Matt. xi. 10.

   [2249] Matt. xi. 4-7.

   [2250] Matt. xi. 4-7.

   [2251] Quadrigam.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XVII.

   [LXVII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xi. 25, "I thank thee, O Father, Lord
   of Heaven and Earth, that thou didst hide these things from the wise
   and understanding," etc.

   1. When the Holy Gospel was being read, we heard that the Lord Jesus
   exulted in Spirit, and said, "I confess to Thee, O Father, Lord of
   heaven and earth, for that Thou hast hid these things from the wise and
   prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes." [2252] Thus much to begin
   [2253] with, we find before we pass on further, if we consider the
   words of the Lord with due attention, with diligence, and above all
   with piety, that we ought not invariably to understand when we read of
   "confession" in the Scriptures, the confession [2254] of a sinner. Now
   especial need there was of saying this, and of reminding you, Beloved,
   of this, because as soon as this word was uttered by the reader's
   voice, there followed upon it the sound of the beating of your breasts,
   when ye had heard, I mean, what the Lord said, "I confess to Thee, O
   Father." At the uttering of these words, "I confess," ye beat your
   breasts. Now what means this beating of the breast, but to show that
   which lies hid within the breast, and to chastise by the visible
   beating the secret sin? And why did ye this, but because ye heard, "I
   confess to Thee, O Father." Ye heard the words "I confess," but ye did
   not consider, who it is that confesses. But consider now. If Christ,
   from whom all sin is far removed, said, "I confess:" confession does
   not belong to the sinner only, but sometimes to him also that praiseth
   God. We confess then, whether in praising God, or accusing ourselves.
   In either case it is a godly confession, either when thou blamest
   thyself, who art not without sin, or when thou praisest Him who can
   have no sin.

   2. But if we consider it well: thine own blame is His praise. For why
   is it that thou dost now confess in accusing thyself for thy sin? in
   accusing thyself why dost thou confess? but because thou art become
   alive from the dead? for the Scripture saith, "Confession perisheth
   from the dead, as from one that is not." [2255] If confession perisheth
   from the dead, he who confesseth must be alive; and if he confesseth
   sin he hath undoubtedly risen again from death. Now if he that
   confesseth sin hath risen again from the dead, who hath raised him? No
   dead man can raise himself. He only was able to raise Himself, who
   though His Body was dead, was not dead. For He raised up that which was
   dead. He raised up Himself, who in Himself was alive, but in His Body
   that was to be raised was dead. For not the Father only, of whom it was
   said by the Apostle, "Wherefore God also hath exalted Him," [2256]
   raised the Son, but the Lord also raised Himself, that is, His Body.
   Whence He said, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it
   again." [2257] But the sinner is dead, especially he whom the load of
   sinful habit presseth down, who is buried as it were like Lazarus. For
   he was not merely dead, he was buried also. [2258] Whosoever then is
   oppressed by the load of evil habit, of a wicked life, of earthly
   lusts, I mean, so that that in his case is true which is piteously
   described in a certain Psalm, "The fool hath said in his heart, There
   is no God," [2259] he is such an one, of whom it is said, "Confession
   perisheth from the dead, as from one that is not." And who shall raise
   him up, but He who when the stone was removed, cried out, and said,
   "Lazarus, Come forth?" [2260] Now what is to "come forth," but to bring
   forth what was hidden? He then who confesseth "cometh forth." "Come
   forth" he could not were he not alive; he could not be alive, had he
   not been raised again. And therefore in confession the accusing of
   one's self, is the praise of God.

   3. Now one may say, what profit then is the Church, if he that
   confesseth comes forth, at once raised to life again by the voice of
   the Lord? What profit to Him that confesseth, is the Church, to which
   the Lord said, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
   heaven." [2261] Consider this very case of Lazarus: he comes forth, but
   with his bands. He was alive already through confession, but he did not
   yet walk free, entangled as he was in his bands. What then doth the
   Church to which it was said, "Whatsoever ye shall loose, shall be
   loosed;" but what [2262] the Lord said forthwith to His disciples,
   "Loose him, and let him go"? [2263]

   4. Whether then we accuse ourselves, or directly praise God, in both
   ways do we praise God. If with a pious intention we accuse ourselves,
   by so doing we praise God. When we praise God directly, we do as it
   were celebrate His Holiness, who is without sin: but when we accuse
   ourselves, we give Him glory, by whom we have risen again. This if thou
   shalt do, the enemy will find none occasion whereby to [2264] overreach
   thee before the judge. For when thou shall be thine own accuser, and
   the Lord thy Deliverer, what shall he be but a mere calumniator? With
   good reason hath the Christian hereby provided protection for himself
   against his enemies, not those that may be seen, flesh and blood, to be
   pitied, rather than to be feared, but against those against whom the
   Apostle exhorts us to arm ourselves: "We wrestle not against flesh and
   blood;" [2265] that is, against men whom ye see raging against you.
   They are but vessels, which another uses, they are but instruments
   which another handles. "The devil," saith the Scripture, "entered into
   the heart of Judas, that he should betray the Lord." [2266] One may say
   then, what have I done? Hear the Apostle, "Give not place to the
   devil." [2267] Thou hast given him place by an evil will: he entered,
   and possessed, and now uses thee. He had not possessed thee, hadst thou
   not given him place.

   5. Therefore doth he warn and say, "We wrestle not against flesh and
   blood, but against principalities and powers." Any one might suppose
   this meant against the kings of the earth, against the powers of this
   world. How so? are they not flesh and blood? And once for all it is
   said, "not against flesh and blood." Turn thy attention from all men.
   What enemies then remain? "Against principalities and powers of
   spiritual wickedness, the rulers of the world." [2268] It might seem as
   though he gave the devil and his angels more than they have. It is so,
   he has called them the "rulers of the world." But to prevent
   misunderstanding, he explains what this world is, of which they are the
   rulers. "The rulers of the world, of this darkness." What is, "of the
   world, of this darkness?" The world is full of those who love it, and
   of unbelievers, over whom he is ruler. This the Apostle calls darkness.
   This darkness the devil and his angels are the rulers of. This is not
   the natural, and unchangeable darkness: this darkness changes, and
   becomes light; it believes, and by believing is enlightened. When this
   takes place in it, it will hear the words, "For ye were sometimes
   darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord." [2269] For when ye were
   darkness, ye were not in the Lord: again, when ye are light, ye are
   light not in yourselves, but in the Lord. "For what hast thou which
   thou hast not received?" [2270] Inasmuch then as they are invisible
   enemies, by invisible means must they be subdued. A visible enemy
   indeed thou mayest overcome by blows; thy invisible enemy thou
   conquerest by belief. A man is a visible enemy; to strike a blow is
   visible also. The devil is an invisible enemy; to believe is invisible
   also. Against invisible enemies then there is an invisible fight.

   6. From these enemies how can any man say that he is safe? For this I
   had begun to speak of, but I thought it necessary to treat of these
   enemies at some little length. But now that we know our enemies, let us
   see to our defence against them. "In praising I will call upon the
   Lord, so shall I be safe from mine enemies." [2271] Thou seest what
   thou hast to do. "In praising call;" that is, "in praising the Lord,
   call." For thou wilt not be safe from thine enemies, if thou praise
   thyself. "In praising call upon the Lord, and thou shalt be safe from
   thine enemies." For what doth the Lord Himself say? "The sacrifice of
   praise shall glorify Me, and there is the way, in which I will show him
   My salvation." [2272] Where is the way? In the sacrifice of praise. Let
   not your foot then wander out of this way. Keep in the way; depart not
   from it; from the praise of the Lord depart not a foot, nay, not a
   nail's breadth. For if thou wilt deviate from this way, and praise
   thyself instead of the Lord, thou wilt not be safe from thine enemies;
   for it is said of them, "They have laid stumbling-blocks for me by the
   way." [2273] Therefore in whatever measure thou thinkest that thou hast
   good of thine own self, thou hast deviated from the praise of God. Why
   dost thou marvel then, if thine enemy seduce thee, when thou art thine
   own seducer? Hear the Apostle, "For if a man think himself to be
   something when he is nothing, he seduceth himself." [2274]

   7. Give heed then to the Lord confessing; "I confess to Thee, O Father,
   Lord of heaven and earth." I confess to Thee, that is, I praise Thee. I
   praise Thee, not I accuse myself. Now as far as the taking of very
   [2275] man is concerned, all is grace, singular and perfect grace. What
   merit had that man [2276] who is Christ, if thou take away the grace,
   even that so pre-eminent grace, whereby it behoved that there should be
   One Christ, and that He whom we acknowledge should be He? Take away
   this grace, and what is Christ but a mere man? what but the same as
   thou art thyself? He took a Soul, He took a Body, He took a perfect
   Man; He uniteth him to Himself, the Lord maketh one Person with the
   servant. What pre-eminent grace is this! Christ in heaven, Christ on
   earth; Christ at once both in heaven and earth; not two Christs, but
   the same Christ, both in heaven and earth. Christ with the Father,
   Christ in the Virgin's womb; Christ on the Cross, Christ succouring
   some souls in hell; and on the self-same day Christ in paradise with
   the robber who confessed. And how did the robber attain [2277] to this
   blessedness, but because he held on that way, in which "He showeth His
   salvation"? That way, from which let not thy foot wander. For in that
   he accused himself, he praised God, and made his own life blessed. He
   looked in hope [2278] for this from the Lord, and said to Him, "Lord,
   remember me when Thou comest into Thy kingdom." [2279] For he
   considered his own wicked deeds, and thought it much, if mercy should
   be shown him even at the last. But the Lord immediately after He had
   said, "Remember me"--when? "when Thou comest into Thy kingdom," saith,
   "Verily I say unto thee, Today shall thou be with Me in paradise."
   Mercy offered at once, what misery deferred.

   8. Hear then the Lord confessing; "I confess to Thee, O Father, Lord of
   heaven and earth." [2280] What do I confess? Wherein do I praise thee?
   For this confession, as I have said before, signifieth praise. "Because
   Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed
   them unto babes." What is this, Brethren? Understand by that which is
   opposed to them. "Thou hast hid these things," saith he, "from the wise
   and prudent;" and he did not say, thou hast revealed them to the
   foolish and imprudent, but "Thou hast hid these things" indeed "from
   the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes." To these wise
   and prudent, who are really objects of derision, to the arrogant who in
   false pretence are great, yet in truth are only swollen up, he opposed
   not the foolish, nor the imprudent, but babes. Who are babes? The
   humble. Therefore "Thou hast hidden these things from the wise and
   prudent." Under the name of the wise and prudent, He hath Himself
   explained that the proud are understood, when He said, "Thou hast
   revealed them unto babes." Therefore from those who are not babes Thou
   hast hidden them. What is from those who are not babes? From those who
   are not humble. And who are they but the proud? O way of the Lord!
   Either there was none, or it lay hid, that it might be revealed to us.
   Why did the Lord exult? "Because it was revealed unto babes." We must
   be little babes; for if we would wish to be great, "wise and prudent"
   as it were, it is not revealed unto us. Who are these great ones? The
   wise and prudent. "Professing themselves to be wise, they became
   fools." [2281] Here then thou hast a remedy suggested from its
   opposite. For if by "professing thyself wise, thou art become a fool;
   profess thyself a fool, and thou wilt be wise." But profess it in
   truth, profess it from the heart, for it is really so as thou
   professest. If thou profess it, do not profess it before men, and
   forbear to profess it before God. As to thyself, and all that is thine,
   thou art altogether dark. For what else is it to be a fool, but to be
   dark in heart? He saith of them at last, "Professing themselves to be
   wise, they became fools." Before they professed this, what do we find?
   "And their foolish heart was darkened." [2282] Acknowledge then that
   thou art not to thyself a light. At best thou art but an eye, thou art
   not the light. And what good is even an open and a sound eye, if the
   light be wanting? Acknowledge therefore that of thine own self thou art
   no light to thyself; and cry out as it is written, "Thou, Lord, wilt
   light my candle: Thou wilt enlighten, O Lord, my darkness with Thy
   Light." [2283] For myself I was all darkness; but Thou art the Light
   that scattereth the darkness, and enlighteneth me; of myself I am no
   light to myself, yea I have no portion of light but in Thee.

   9. So John also, the friend of the Bridegroom, was thought to be the
   Christ, was thought to be the Light. "He was not that Light, but that
   he might bear witness of the Light." [2284] But what was the Light? It
   was the true Light. What is the true Light? "That which lighteneth
   every man." If that be the true Light which lighteneth every man, then
   it lightened John also, who professed and confessed rightly, "Of His
   fulness have all we received." [2285] See if he said ought else, but
   "Thou, O Lord, shalt lighten my candle." Finally, being now
   enlightened, He gave His testimony. For the benefit of the blind the
   lamp gave witness to the Day. See how that He is a lamp; "Ye sent," He
   said, "unto John, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his
   light; he was a burning and a shining lamp." [2286] He, the lamp, that
   is, a thing enlightened, was lighted that it might shine. That which
   can be lighted can be extinguished also. Now that it may not be
   extinguished, let it not expose itself to the wind of pride. Therefore,
   "I confess to Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because Thou
   hast hid these things from the wise and prudent," from those who
   thought themselves to be light, and were darkness; and who because they
   were darkness, and thought themselves to be light, could not even be
   enlightened. But they who were darkness, and confessed that they were
   darkness, were little babes, not great; were humble, not proud. Rightly
   therefore did they say, "O Lord, Thou wilt lighten my candle." They
   knew themselves, they praised the Lord. They did not stray from the way
   of salvation; "They in praise called upon the Lord, and they were saved
   from their enemies." [2287]

   10. Turning then to the Lord our God, the Father Almighty, in purity of
   heart, let us render unto Him, as our frailty best can, our highest and
   abundant thanks, with our whole mind praying His singular goodness,
   that in His good pleasure He would vouchsafe to hear our prayers, that
   by His Power He would drive out the enemy from our deeds and thoughts,
   would enlarge our faith, direct our minds, grant us spiritual thoughts,
   and bring us safe to His endless blessedness, through His Son Jesus
   Christ. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2252] Matt. xi. 25.

   [2253] Interim.

   [2254] Vocem.

   [2255] Ecclus. xvii. 28, Sept.

   [2256] Phil. ii. 9.

   [2257] John ii. 19.

   [2258] John xi. 17.

   [2259] Ps. xiv. 1.

   [2260] John xi. 43.

   [2261] Matt. xvi. 19 and xviii. 18.

   [2262] Vid. Serm. 48 (98, Bened.) 6.

   [2263] John xi. 44.

   [2264] Circumveniat.

   [2265] Eph. vi. 12.

   [2266] John xiii. 2.

   [2267] Eph. iv. 27.

   [2268] Vulgate.

   [2269] Eph. v. 8.

   [2270] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

   [2271] Ps. xvii. 4, Sept. (xviii. 3, English version).

   [2272] Ps. xlix. 23, Sept. (l. English version).

   [2273] Ps. cxxxix. 6, Sept. (cxl. 5, English version).

   [2274] Gal. vi. 3, Vulg.

   [2275] Ipsius.

   [2276] It was the doctrine of Paul of Samosata, that the man Christ was
   exalted to be the Son of God (prokope, from Luke ii. 52), as if by
   merit. Origen seems to hold the same, at least as regards the
   (supposed) pre-existent soul of Christ (vid. Huet. Origen, ii. 3, § 6;
   vid. however De la Rue's note); and the Arians, at least implicitly
   (Socr. Hist. i. 6, Athan. Orat. contr. Arian, i. 35, iii. 51; and
   Leporius, Cassian. Incarn. i. 3, 4). The same heresy was imputed to the
   Nestorians (but falsely according to Garner, in Mar. Merc. pt. i. p.
   431), and thereby connected them with the Pelagians, as if unassisted
   human nature could merit grace. The Church on the other hand,
   proceeding from Rom. i. 4, taught that the human nature which became
   the manhood of the Word was predestined to be such by grace before its
   creation, and became such in the moment of creation. St. Athanasius
   touches on this subject against the Arians (Orat. i. 46); St. Augustin
   enlarges on it against the Pelagians (De Prædest. Sanct. 23, 30; De
   Corrept. et Grat. 30); St. Cyril, against the Nestorians (Contra Nest.
   iii. p. 83); Vigilius, against the Monophysites (Contra Eutych. v. B.
   P. t. 4, p. 528, ed. 1624). When St. Augustin says "that man," he is
   speaking of our Lord's human nature as abstracted from that Divine
   Person in whom it actually existed, and not as if it ever existed as a
   separate hypostasis. This use of "homo" and anthropos is very frequent
   with the Fathers; what is more startling is the expression "homo ille,"
   yet vid. also Augustin, De Præd. Sanct. 30; Alcuin, De Trin. iii. 1;
   Agobard, Cont. Felic. B. P. t. 9, p. 1194. However, this point is a
   subject of debate among theologians (vid. Petav. De Incarn. xi. fin.).

   [2277] Meruit.

   [2278] Præsumpsit.

   [2279] Luke xxiii. 42.

   [2280] Matt. xi. 25.

   [2281] Rom. i. 22.

   [2282] Rom. i. 21.

   [2283] Ps. xviii. 28.

   [2284] John i. 8.

   [2285] John i. 16.

   [2286] John v. 33, etc.

   [2287] Ps. xviii. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XVIII.

   [LXVIII. Ben.]

   Again on the words of the Gospel, Matt. xi. 25, "I thank thee, O
   Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth," etc.

   1. We have heard the Son of God saying, "I confess to Thee, O Father,
   Lord of heaven and earth." What doth he confess to Him? Wherein doth he
   praise Him? "Because Thou hast hid these things from the wise and
   prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes." [2288] Who are the "wise
   and prudent"? Who the "babes"? What hath He hid from the wise and
   prudent, and revealed unto babes? By the "wise and prudent," He
   signifieth those of whom St. Paul speaks; "Where is the wise? where is
   the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Hath not God made
   foolish the wisdom of this world?" [2289] Yet perhaps thou still askest
   who they are. They are they peradventure who in their much disputation
   concerning God, have spoken falsely of Him; who, puffed up by their own
   doctrines, could in no wise find out and know God, and who for the God
   whose substance is incomprehensible and invisible, have thought the air
   and sky to be God, or the sun to be God, or anything which holds high
   place [2290] among the creatures to be God. For observing the grandeur
   and beauty and powers of the creatures, they rested in them, and found
   not the Creator.

   2. These men does the Book of wisdom reprove, where it is said, "For if
   they were able to know so much as to aim at the world, how did they not
   sooner find out the Lord thereof?" [2291] They are accused as wasting
   their time and their busy disputes in investigating and measuring as it
   were the creature; they sought out the courses of the stars, the
   intervals of the planets, the movements [2292] of the heavenly bodies,
   so as to arrive by certain [2293] calculations to that degree of
   knowledge as to foretell the eclipses of the sun and moon; and that as
   they had foretold, so should the event be according to the day and
   hour, and to the portion of the bodies which should be eclipsed. Great
   industry, great activity of mind. But in these things they sought after
   the Creator, who was not far off from them, and they found Him not.
   Whom if they could have found, they might have had within them. With
   the best reason then, and very rightly were they accused, who could
   investigate the numbers of the stars, and their varied movements, and
   know and foretell the eclipses of the luminaries: rightly accused, I
   say, in that they found not Him by whom these had been created and
   ordained, because they neglected to seek Him. But be not thou much
   disquieted, if thou art ignorant of the courses of the stars, and the
   proportions [2294] of the celestial and terrestrial bodies. Behold the
   fair beauty of the world, and praise its Creator's counsel. Behold what
   He has made, and love Him who made it: be this thy greatest care. Love
   Him who made it; for He made thee also after His own image, that thou
   mightest love Him.

   3. If then it is strange that those things of which Christ said, "Thou
   hast hid these things from the wise and prudent," were hidden from such
   wise men as these, who, occupied wholly about the creatures, chose to
   seek the Creator carelessly, and could not find Him; still more strange
   is it that there should even be found some "wise and prudent" men who
   were able to know Him. "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven
   against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men who hold the truth
   in unrighteousness." [2295] Perhaps thou dost ask, what truth do they
   hold in unrighteousness? "Because that which may be known of God is
   manifest among them." How is it manifest? He goes on to say, "For God
   hath manifested it to them." [2296] Dost thou still enquire how He
   manifested it to them to whom He gave not the law? How? "For the
   invisible things of Him from the creation of the world are clearly
   seen, being understood by the things that are made." [2297] There were
   then some such, not as Moses the servant of God, not as many Prophets
   who had an insight into and knowledge of these things, and were aided
   by the Spirit of God, which they drew in by faith, and drank with the
   throat [2298] of godliness, and poured [2299] forth again by the mouth
   of the interior man. Not such as these were they; but far unlike them,
   who by means of this visible creation were able to attain to the
   understanding of the Creator, and to say of these things which God hath
   made; [2300] Behold what things He hath made, He governeth and
   containeth also. He who hath made them, Himself filleth what He hath
   made with His own presence. Thus much they were enabled to say. For
   these Paul also made mention of in the Acts of the Apostles, where,
   when he had said of God, "For in Him we live and move and have our
   being" [2301] (forasmuch as he was speaking to the Athenians among whom
   those learned men had existed); he subjoined immediately; "As certain
   also of your own have said." Now it was no trivial thing they said;
   "That in Him we live and move and have our being."

   4. In what then were they unlike the others? why were they blamed? why
   rightly accused? Hear the words of the Apostle which I had begun to
   quote; "The wrath of God," saith he, "is revealed from heaven against
   all ungodliness" (even of those, namely, who had not received the law);
   "against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth
   in unrighteousness." What truth? "Because that which may be known of
   God is manifest in them." By whose manifestation of it? "For God hath
   manifested it to them." How? "For the invisible things of Him from the
   creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things
   that are made, even His Eternal Power and Godhead." Why did He manifest
   it? "That they might be without excuse." Wherein then are they to be
   blamed? "Because that when they knew God, they glorified Him not as
   God."

   5. What mean these words, "Glorified Him not as God?" They did not give
   Him thanks. Is this then to glorify God; to give God thanks? Yes,
   verily. For what can be worse, if having been created after the image
   of God, and having come to know God, thou shalt not be thankful to Him?
   This surely, this is to glorify God, to give God thanks. The faithful
   know where and when it is said, "Let us give thanks unto our Lord God."
   But who gives thanks to God, save he who "lifts up his heart unto the
   Lord?" Therefore are they blameable and without excuse, "Because when
   they knew God, they glorified Him not as God, nor gave Him thanks.
   But"--what? "But they became vain in their imaginations." Whence did
   they become vain, but because they were proud? Thus smoke vanishes away
   by rising up aloft, and a flame burns the more brightly and strongly in
   proportion as it is kept [2302] low; "They became vain in their
   imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened." So smoke, though
   it rise higher than the flame, is dark.

   6. Finally, mark what follows, and see the point on which the whole
   matter depends. "For professing themselves to be wise, they became
   fools." For arrogating to themselves what God had given, God took away
   what He had given. Therefore from the proud He hid Himself, who
   conveyed the knowledge of Himself only to those who through the
   creature sought diligently after the Creator. Well then did our Lord
   say, "Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent;" whether
   from those who in their manifold disputations, and most busy search,
   have reached to the full investigation of the creature, but knew
   nothing of the Creator, or from them who when they knew God, glorified
   Him not as God, nor gave Him thanks, and who could not see perfectly or
   healthfully because they were proud. "Therefore Thou hast hid these
   things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes."
   What babes? To the lowly. Say on whom doth My Spirit rest? "Upon him
   that is lowly and quiet, and who trembleth at My words." [2303] At
   these words Peter trembled; Plato trembled not. Let the fisherman hold
   fast what that most famous philosopher has lost. "Thou hast hid these
   things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes."
   Thou hast hid them from the proud, and revealed them to the humble.
   What things are these? For when He said this, He did not intend the
   heaven and earth, or point them out as it were with His hand as He
   spake. For these who does not see? The good see them, the bad see them;
   for He "maketh His sun to rise on the evil and the good." [2304] What
   then are these things? "All things are delivered unto Me of My Father."
   [2305]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2288] Matt. xi. 25.

   [2289] 1 Cor. i. 20.

   [2290] Sublimiter eminet.

   [2291] Wisd. xiii. 9.

   [2292] Itinera.

   [2293] Vid. Conf. v. 3 (4).

   [2294] Numeros.

   [2295] Rom. i. 18.

   [2296] Rom. i. 19.

   [2297] Rom. i. 20.

   [2298] Faucibus.

   [2299] Ructuaverunt.

   [2300] Vid. Conf. vii. 9 (13-15).

   [2301] Acts xvii. 28.

   [2302] Humilius apprehendendo.

   [2303] Isa. lxvi. 2.

   [2304] Matt. v. 45.

   [2305] Matt. xi. 27.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XIX.

   [LXIX. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xix. 28, "Come unto me, all ye that
   labour and are heavy laden," etc.

   1. We heard in the Gospel that the Lord, rejoicing greatly in Spirit,
   said unto God the Father, "I confess to Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven
   and earth, because Thou hast hid these things from the wise and
   prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father: for so it
   seemed good in Thy sight. All things are delivered unto Me of My
   Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any
   man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal
   Him." [2306] I have labour in talking, you in hearing: let us then both
   give ear to Him who goes on to say, "Come unto Me, all ye that labour."
   [2307] For why do we labour all, except that we are mortal men, frail
   creatures and infirm, bearing about vessels of clay which crowd and
   straiten one another. But if these vessels of flesh are straitened, let
   the open [2308] expanse of charity be enlarged. What then does He mean
   by, "Come unto Me, all ye that labour," but that ye may labour no more?
   In a word, His promise is clear enough; forasmuch as He called those
   who were in labour, they might perchance enquire, for what profit they
   were called: "and," saith He, "I will refresh you."

   2. "Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me;" [2309] not to raise the
   fabric of the world, not to create all things visible and invisible,
   not in the world so created to work miracles and raise the dead; but,
   "that I am meek and lowly in heart." Thou wishest to be great, begin
   from the least. Thou art thinking to construct some mighty fabric in
   height; first think of the foundation of humility. And how great soever
   a mass of building one may wish and design to place above it, the
   greater the building is to be, the deeper does he dig his foundation.
   The building in the course of its erection, rises up on high, but he
   who digs its foundation, must first go down very low. So then you see
   even a building is low before it is high, and the top is raised only
   after humiliation.

   3. What is the top in the erection of that building which we are
   constructing? Whither will the highest point of this building reach? I
   say at once, even to the Vision of God. Ye see how high, how great a
   thing it is to see God. Whoso longeth after it, understands both what I
   say and what he hears. The Vision of God is promised to us, of the very
   God, the Supreme God. For this is good, to see Him who seeth. For they
   who worship false gods, see them easily; but they see them "who have
   eyes and see not." But to us is promised the Vision of the Living and
   the Seeing God, that we may desire eagerly to see that God of whom
   Scripture saith, "He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that
   formed the eye, doth he not consider?" [2310] Doth He then not hear,
   who hath made for thee that whereby thou hearest? and doth not He see,
   who hath created that whereby thou seest? Well therefore in the
   foregoing words of this very Psalm doth He say, "Understand therefore
   ye unwise among the people, and ye fools at length be wise." [2311] For
   many men commit evil deeds whilst they think they are not seen by God.
   And it is difficult indeed for them to believe that He cannot see them;
   but they think that He will not. Few are found of such great impiety,
   that that should be fulfilled in them which is written, "The fool hath
   said in his heart, There is no God." [2312] This is but the madness of
   a few. For as great piety belongs but to the few, no less also does
   great impiety. But the multitude of men speak thus: What! is God
   thinking now upon this, that He should know what I am doing in my
   house, and does God care for what I may choose to do upon my bed? Who
   says this? "Understand, ye unwise among the people, and ye fools at
   length be wise." Because as being a man, it is a labour for thee to
   know all that takes place in thy house, and for all the doings and
   words of thy servants to reach thee; thinkest thou that it is a like
   labour for God to observe thee, who did not labour to create thee? Doth
   not He fix His eye upon thee, who made thine eye? Thou wast not, and He
   created thee and gave thee being; and doth not He care for thee now
   that thou art, who "calleth those things which be not as though they
   were"? [2313] Do not then promise thyself this. Whether thou wilt or
   no, He seeth thee, and there is no place whither thou canst hide
   thyself from His eyes. "For if thou goest up into heaven, He is there;
   if thou goest down into hell, He is there also." [2314] Great is thy
   labour, whilst unwilling to depart from evil deeds: yet wishest not to
   be seen by God. Hard labour truly! Daily art thou wishing to do evil,
   and dost thou suspect that thou art not seen? Hear the Scripture which
   saith, "He that planted the ear, shall He not hear? He that formed the
   eye, doth not He consider?" Where canst thou hide thy evil deeds from
   the eyes of God? If thou wilt not depart from them, thy labour is great
   indeed.

   4. Hear Him then who saith, "Come unto Me, all ye that labour." Thou
   canst not end thy labour by flying. Dost thou choose to fly from Him,
   and not rather to Him? Find out then whither thou canst escape, and so
   fly. But if thou canst not fly from Him, for that He is everywhere
   present; fly (it is quite nigh [2315] ) to God, who is present where
   thou art standing. Fly. Lo in thy flight thou hast passed the heavens,
   He is there; thou hast descended into hell, He is there; whatever
   deserts of the earth thou shalt choose, there is He, who hath said, "I
   fill heaven and earth." [2316] If then He fills heaven and earth, and
   there is no place whither thou canst fly from Him; cease this thy
   labour, and fly to His presence, lest thou feel His coming. Take
   courage from the [2317] hope that thou shalt by well-living see Him, by
   whom even in thy evil living thou art seen. For in evil living thou
   canst be seen, thou canst not see; but by well-living thou art both
   seen and seest. For with how much more tender nearness [2318] will He
   who crowneth the worthy look on thee, who in His pity saw thee that He
   might call thee when unworthy? Nathanael said to the Lord whom as yet
   he did not know, "Whence knewest thou me?" The Lord said unto him,
   "When thou wast under the fig-tree I saw thee." [2319] Christ saw thee
   in thine own shade; and will He not see thee in His Light? For what is,
   "When thou wast under the fig-tree I saw thee"? What does it mean? Call
   to mind the original sin of Adam, in whom we all die. When he first
   sinned, he made himself aprons of fig-leaves, [2320] signifying by
   these leaves the irritations of lust to which he had been reduced by
   sinning. Hence are we born; in this condition are we born; born in
   sinful flesh, which "the likeness of sinful flesh" alone can cure.
   Therefore "God sent His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh."
   [2321] He came of this flesh, but He came not as other men. For the
   Virgin conceived Him not by lust, but by faith. He came into the
   Virgin, who was before the Virgin. He made choice of her whom He
   created, He created her whom He designed to choose. He brought to the
   Virgin fruitfulness: He took not away her unimpaired purity. He then
   who came to thee without the irritation of the leaves of the fig-tree,
   "when thou wast under the fig-tree," saw thee. Make ready then to see
   Him in His height of glory, [2322] by whom in His pity thou wast seen.
   But because the top is high, think of the foundation. What foundation?
   dost thou say? "Learn of Him, for He is meek and lowly in heart." Dig
   this foundation of lowliness deep in thee, and so wilt thou attain to
   the crowning top of charity. "Turning to the Lord," etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2306] Matt. xi. 25-27.

   [2307] Matt. xi. 28.

   [2308] Spatia.

   [2309] Matt. xi. 29.

   [2310] Ps. xciii. 9, Sept. (xciv. English version).

   [2311] Ps. xciii. 8, Sept. (xciv. English version).

   [2312] Ps. xiv. 1.

   [2313] Rom. iv. 17.

   [2314] Ps. cxxxix. 8.

   [2315] De proximo.

   [2316] Jer. xxiii. 24.

   [2317] Præsume.

   [2318] Familiarius.

   [2319] John i. 48.

   [2320] Gen. iii. 7.

   [2321] Rom. viii. 3.

   [2322] Sublimiter.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XX.

   [LXX. Ben.]

   Again on the words of the Gospel, Matt. xi. 28, "Come unto me, all ye
   that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest," etc.

   1. It seems strange to some, Brethren, when they hear the Lord say,
   "Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will
   refresh you. Take my yoke upon you and learn of Me, for I am meek and
   lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is
   easy and My burden is light." [2323] And they consider that they who
   have fearlessly bowed their necks to this yoke, and have with much
   submission taken this burden upon their shoulders, are tossed about and
   exercised by so great difficulties in the world, that they seem not to
   be called from labour to rest, but from rest to labour rather; since
   the Apostle also saith, "All who will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
   suffer persecution." [2324] So one will say, "How is the yoke easy, and
   the burden light," when to bear this yoke and burden is nothing else,
   but to live godly in Christ? And how is it said, "Come unto Me, all ye
   that labour and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you"? and not
   rather said, "Come ye who are at ease and idle, that ye may labour."
   For so he found those men idle and at ease, whom he hired into the
   vineyard, [2325] that they might bear the heat of the day. And we hear
   the Apostle under that easy yoke and light burden say, "In all things
   approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in
   afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes," [2326] etc.,
   and in another place of the same Epistle, "Of the Jews five times
   received I forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once
   was I stoned, thrice have I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have
   I been in the deep:" [2327] and the rest of the perils, which may be
   enumerated indeed, but endured they cannot be but by the help of the
   Holy Spirit.

   2. All these grievous and heavy trials which he mentioned, did he very
   frequently and abundantly sustain; but in very deed the Holy Spirit was
   with him in the wasting of the outward man, to renew the inner man from
   day to day, and by the taste of spiritual rest in the affluence of the
   delights of God to soften down by the hope of future blessedness all
   present hardships, and to alleviate all heavy trials. Lo, how sweet a
   yoke of Christ did he bear, and how light a burden; so that he could
   say that all those hard and grievous sufferings at the recital of which
   as just above every hearer shudders, were a "light tribulation;" as he
   beheld with the inward eyes, the eyes of faith, at how great a price of
   things temporal must be purchased the life to come, the escape from the
   everlasting pains of the ungodly, the full enjoyment, free from all
   anxiety, of the eternal happiness of the righteous. Men suffer
   themselves to be cut and burnt, that the pains not of eternity, but of
   some more lasting sore than usual, may be bought off at the priceof
   severer pain. For a languid and uncertain period of a very short
   repose, and that too at the end of life, the soldier is worn down by
   all the hard trials of war, restless it may be for more years in his
   labours, than he will have to enjoy his rest in ease. To what storms
   and tempests, to what a fearful and tremendous raging of sky and sea,
   do the busy merchantmen expose themselves, that they may acquire riches
   inconstant as the wind, and full of perils and tempests, greater even
   than those by which they were acquired! What heats, and colds, what
   perils, from horses, from ditches, from precipices, from rivers, from
   wild beasts, do huntsmen undergo, what pain of hunger and thirst, what
   straitened allowances of the cheapest and meanest meat and drink, that
   they may catch a beast! and sometimes after all, the flesh of the beast
   for which they endure all this is of no use for the table. And although
   a boar or a stag be caught, it is more sweet to the hunter's mind
   because it has been caught, than it is to the eater's palate because it
   is dressed. By what sharp corrections of almost daily stripes is the
   tender age of boys brought under! By what great pains even of watching
   and abstinence in the schools are they exercised, not to learn true
   wisdom, but for the sake of riches, and the honours of an empty show,
   that they may learn arithmetic, [2328] and other literature, and the
   deceits of eloquence!

   3. Now in all these instances, they who do not love these things feel
   them as great severities; whereas they who love them endure the same,
   it is true, but they do not seem to feel them severe. For love makes
   all, the hardest and most distressing things, altogether easy, and
   almost nothing. How much more surely then and easily will charity do
   with a view to true blessedness, that which mere desire does as it can,
   with a view to what is but misery? How easily is any temporal adversity
   endured, if it be that eternal punishment may be avoided, and eternal
   rest procured! Not without good reason did that vessel of election say
   with exceeding joy, "The sufferings of this present time are not worthy
   to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us." [2329]
   See then how it is that that "yoke is easy, and that burden light." And
   if it be strait to the few who choose it, yet is it easy to all who
   love it. The Psalmist saith, "Because of the words of Thy lips I have
   kept hard ways." [2330] But the things which are hard to those who
   labour, lose their roughness [2331] to those same men when they love.
   Wherefore it has been so arranged by the dispensation of the Divine
   goodness, that to "the inner man who is renewed from day to day,"
   [2332] placed no longer under the Law but under Grace, and freed from
   the burdens of numberless observances which were indeed a heavy yoke,
   but meetly imposed on a stubborn neck, every grievous trouble which
   that prince who is cast forth could inflict from without on the outward
   man, should through the easiness of a simple faith, and a good hope,
   and a holy charity, become light through the joy within. For to a good
   will nothing is so easy, as this good will to itself, and this is
   enough for God. How much soever therefore this world may rage, most
   truly did the angels exclaim when the Lord was born in the flesh,
   "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men of good will;"
   [2333] because "His yoke," who was then born, "is easy, and His burden
   light." And as the Apostle saith, "God is faithful, who will not suffer
   us to be tempted above that we are able to bear; but will with the
   temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it."
   [2334]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2323] Matt. xi. 28-30.

   [2324] 2 Tim. iii. 12.

   [2325] Matt. xx. 4.

   [2326] 2 Cor. vi. 4.

   [2327] 2 Cor. xi. 24, etc.

   [2328] Numeros.

   [2329] Rom. viii. 18.

   [2330] Ps. xvi. 4, Sept. (xvii. English version).

   [2331] Mitescunt.

   [2332] 2 Cor. iv. 16.

   [2333] Luke ii. 14.

   [2334] 1 Cor. x. 13.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXI.

   [LXXI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xii. 32, "Whosoever shall speak a
   word against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in
   this world, nor in that which is to come." Or, "on the blasphemy
   against the Holy Ghost."

   1. There has been a great question raised touching the late lesson of
   the Gospel, to the solution of which I am unequal by any power of mine
   own; but "our sufficiency is of God," [2335] to whatever degree we are
   capable of receiving His aid. First then consider the magnitude of the
   question; that when ye see the weight of it laid upon my shoulders, ye
   may pray in aid of my labours, and in the assistance which is
   vouchsafed to me, may find edification for your own souls. When "one
   possessed with a devil was brought to the Lord, blind and dumb, and He
   had healed him so that he could speak and see, and all the people were
   amazed and said, Is not this the Son of David? the Pharisees hearing it
   said, This fellow doth not cast out devils but by Beelzebub the prince
   of the devils. But Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every
   kingdom divided against itself shall be brought to desolation, and
   every city or house divided against itself shall not stand. And if
   Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall then his
   kingdom stand?" [2336] In these words He wished it to be understood
   from their own confession, that, through their not believing in Him
   they had chosen to belong to the kingdom of the devil, which as being
   divided against itself could accordingly not stand. Let then the
   Pharisees make choice of which they will. If Satan cannot cast out
   Satan, they can find nothing to say against the Lord; but if he can,
   then let them much more look to themselves, and depart out of his
   kingdom, which as being divided against itself cannot stand.

   2. But now that they may not think that it is the prince of the devils
   in whom the Lord Jesus Christ casteth out devils, let them attend to
   what follows; "And if I," He saith, "by Beelzebub cast out devils, by
   whom do your children cast them out? Therefore shall they be your
   judges." [2337] He spoke this undoubtedly of his disciples, the
   "children" of that people; who as being the disciples of the Lord Jesus
   Christ were well conscious that they had learnt no evil arts from their
   Good Master, that through the prince of the devils they should cast out
   devils. "Therefore," He saith, "shall they be your judges." They, He
   saith, the base and contemptible things of this world, in whom none of
   this artificial malice, but the holy simplicity of My power [2338] is
   seen; they shall be My witnesses, they shall be your judges. Then He
   subjoins, "But if I by the Spirit of God cast out devils, then the
   kingdom of God is come unto you." [2339] What is this? "If I by the
   Spirit of God cast out devils," He saith, and your children, to whom I
   have given no hurtful and deceitful doctrine but a simple faith, can in
   no other way cast them out; no doubt the kingdom of God is come unto
   you; whereby the kingdom of the devil is subverted, and ye also are
   subverted with it.

   3. And after that He had said, "By whom do your children cast them
   out?" to show that in them it was His grace, not their own desert; He
   saith, "Or else how can one enter into a strong man's house and spoil
   his goods, except He first bind the strong man, and then He will spoil
   his house?" [2340] Your children, saith He, who either have already
   believed in Me, or who shall yet believe, and cast out devils, not
   through the prince of the devils, but through the simplicity of
   holiness, who assuredly either once were, or still are what ye are
   also, sinners and ungodly; and so in the house of the devil, and the
   vessels of the devil, how could they be rescued from him whom he held
   so firmly through the iniquity which reigned over them, unless he were
   bound by the chains of My justice, that I might take away from him his
   vessels which once were vessels of wrath, and make them vessels of
   mercy? This it is which the blessed Apostle also says when he rebukes
   the proud, and those who boast as it were of their own deserts, "For
   who maketh thee to differ?" [2341] That is, who maketh thee to differ
   from the mass of perdition derived from Adam and from the vessels of
   wrath. And that no man might say, "My own righteousness," he says,
   "What hast thou, that thou didst not receive?" And on this point he
   says of himself also, "We also once were by nature the children of
   wrath, even as others." [2342] So then he himself was a vessel in the
   house of that strong one, strong in evil, when he was a persecutor of
   the Church, a "blasphemer, injurious, living in malice and envy," as he
   confesses. But He who bound the strong one, took away from him this
   vessel of perdition, and made it a vessel of election.

   4. Afterwards, that the unbelievers and ungodly, the enemies of the
   Christian name, might not suppose by reason of the divers heresies and
   schisms of those who under the Christian name gather together flocks of
   lost sheep, that the kingdom of Christ also is divided against itself,
   He next adds, "He that is not with Me is against Me, and he that
   gathereth not with Me, scattereth abroad." [2343] He does not say, he
   who is under the outward profession [2344] of My Name; or the form of
   My Sacrament; but "he who is not with Me is against Me." Nor doth He
   say, he who gathereth not under the outward profession of My Name; but
   "he who gathereth not with Me, scattereth abroad." Christ's kingdom
   then is not divided against itself; but men try to divide that which
   was bought with the price of the Blood of Christ. "For the Lord knoweth
   them that are His. And, let every one that nameth the Name of Christ
   depart from iniquity." [2345] For if he depart not from iniquity, he
   belongeth not to the kingdom of Christ, even though he name the Name of
   Christ. To give then some illustrations for example's sake, the spirit
   of covetousness, and the spirit of luxuriousness, because the one heaps
   together, and the other lavishes, are divided against themselves; yet
   they belong both to the kingdom of the devil. Among idolaters the
   spirit of Juno and the spirit of Hercules, are divided against
   themselves; and both belong to the kingdom of the devil. The heathen
   Christ's enemy, and the Jew Christ's enemy, are divided against
   themselves; and both belong to the kingdom of the devil. Arianus and
   Photinianus both are heretics, and both are divided against themselves.
   The Donatist and Maximianist [2346] both are heretics, and both divided
   against themselves. All men's vices and errors that are contrary to
   each other are divided against themselves, and all belong to the
   kingdom of the devil; therefore his kingdom shall not stand. But the
   righteous and the ungodly, the believer and the unbeliever, the
   Catholic and the heretic, are indeed divided against themselves, but
   they do not belong all to the kingdom of Christ. "The Lord knoweth them
   that are His." Let no one flatter himself upon a mere name. If he would
   that the Name of the Lord should profit him, let "him that calleth upon
   the Name of the Lord depart from iniquity."

   5. But these words of the Gospel, though they had some obscurity, which
   I think by the Lord's assistance I have explained, were yet not so
   difficult, as that which follows would seem to be. "Wherefore I say
   unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men,
   but the blasphemy against the Spirit shall not be forgiven unto men.
   And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of Man, it shall be
   forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall
   not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to
   come." [2347] What then will become of those whom the Church desires to
   gain? When they have been reformed and come into the Church from
   whatsoever error, is the hope in the remission of all sins that is
   promised them a false hope? For who is not convicted of having spoken a
   word against the Holy Ghost, before he became a Christian or a
   Catholic? In the first place, are not they who are called Pagans, the
   worshippers of many and false gods, and the adorers of idols, forasmuch
   as they say that the Lord Christ wrought miracles by magical arts, are
   not they like these who said that He cast out devils through the prince
   of the devils? And again, when day by day they blaspheme our
   sanctification, what else blaspheme they but the Holy Ghost? What? Do
   not the Jews--they who spoke concerning our Lord what gave occasion to
   this very discourse--do they not even to the present day speak a word
   against the Holy Ghost, by denying that He is now in Christians, just
   as the others denied Him to be in Christ? For not even did they revile
   the Holy Ghost, by asserting either that He existed not, or that though
   He existed, yet that He was not God, but a creature; or that He had no
   power to cast out devils; they did not speak thus unworthily, or
   anything like it, of the Holy Ghost. For the Sadducees indeed denied
   the Holy Ghost; but the Pharisees maintained His existence against
   their heresy, [2348] but they denied that He was in the Lord Jesus
   Christ, who they thought cast out devils through the prince of the
   devils, whereas He did cast them out through the Holy Ghost. And hence,
   both Jews and whatsoever heretics there are who confess the Holy Ghost,
   but deny that He is in the Body of Christ, which is His One Only
   Church, none other than the One Catholic Church, are without doubt like
   the Pharisees who at that time although they confessed the existence of
   the Holy Ghost, yet denied that He was in Christ, whose works in
   casting out devils they attributed to the prince of devils. I say
   nothing of the fact that some heretics either boldly maintain that the
   Holy Ghost is not the Creator but a creature, as the Arians, and
   Eunomians, and Macedonians, or so entirely deny His existence, as to
   deny that God is Trinity, but assert that He is God the Father only,
   and that He is sometimes called the Son, and sometimes the Holy Ghost;
   as the Sabellians, whom some call Patripassians, because they hold that
   the Father suffered; and forasmuch as they deny that He has any Son,
   without doubt they deny His Holy Spirit also. The Photinians again who
   say that the Father only is God, and the Son a mere man, deny
   altogether that there is any third Person of the Holy Ghost.

   6. It is plain then that the Holy Ghost is blasphemed both by Pagans,
   and by Jews, and by heretics. Are they then to be left, and accounted
   without all hope, since the sentence is fixed, "Whosoever speaketh a
   word against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven him, neither in
   this world, neither in the world to come"? and are they only to be
   deemed free from the guilt of this most grievous sin who are Catholics
   from infancy? For all those who have believed the word of God, that
   they might become Catholics, came surely into the grace and peace of
   Christ, either from among the Pagans, or Jews, or heretics: and if
   there be no pardon for them for the word which they have spoken against
   the Holy Ghost, in vain do we promise and preach to men, to turn to
   God, and receive peace and remission of sins, whether in Baptism or in
   the Church. For it is not said, "It shall not be forgiven him except in
   baptism;" but, "it shall not be forgiven, neither in this world,
   neither in the world to come."

   7. Some think that they only sin against the Holy Ghost, who having
   been washed in the laver of regeneration in the Church, and having
   received the Holy Spirit, as though unthankful for so great a gift of
   the Saviour, have plunged themselves afterwards into any deadly sin; as
   adultery, or murder, or an absolute apostasy, [2349] either altogether
   from the Christian name, or from the Catholic Church. But how this
   sense of it may be proved, I know not; since the place of repentance is
   not denied in the Church to any sins whatever; and the Apostle says
   that heretics themselves are to be reproved to this end, "If God
   peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the
   truth; And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
   devil, who are taken captive by him at his will." [2350] For what is
   the advantage of amendment without any hope of forgiveness? Finally,
   The Lord did not say, "the baptized [2351] Catholic who shall speak a
   word against the Holy Ghost;" but "he who," that is whosoever speaketh,
   be he who he may, "it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world,
   neither in the world to come." Whether then he be a heathen, or a Jew,
   or a Christian, or a heretic from among Jews or Christians, or
   whatsoever other title of error he have, it is not said, this man, or
   that man; but "whosoever speaketh a word against the Holy Ghost," that
   is who blasphemeth the Holy Ghost, "it shall not be forgiven him,
   neither in this world, neither in the world to come." But moreover if
   every error contrary to truth, and inimical to Christian peace, as we
   have shown before, "speaketh a word against the Holy Ghost;" and yet
   the Church doth not cease to reform and gather out of every error those
   who shall receive remission of sins, and the Holy Ghost Himself, whom
   they have blasphemed; I think I have discovered an important secret for
   the clearing up this so great a question. Let us seek then from the
   Lord the light of explanation.

   8. Lift up then, Brethren, lift up unto me your ears, and your hearts
   unto the Lord. I tell you, my Beloved; perhaps there is not in all holy
   Scripture found a more important or more difficult question. Wherefore
   (that I may make you a confession about myself), I have always in my
   discourses to the people avoided the difficulty and embarrassment of
   this question; not because I had no ideas of any sort on the subject,
   for in a matter of such great importance, I would not be negligent in
   "asking," and "seeking," and "knocking;" but because I did not think I
   could do justice [2352] to that understanding of it which was in some
   degree opened to me, by words suggested at the moment. But as I
   listened to to-day's lesson, upon which it was my duty to discourse to
   you, as the Gospel was being read, there was such a beating at my
   heart, that I believed that it was God's will that you should hear
   something on the subject by my ministry.

   9. First then, I pray you to consider and understand that the Lord did
   not say, "No blasphemy of the Spirit shall be forgiven," or, "whosoever
   speaketh any word whatsoever against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
   forgiven him;" but "whosoever speaketh a word;" [2353] for had he said
   the former, there would have remained to us no subject of disputation
   at all. Since if no blasphemy, and no word which is spoken against the
   Holy Ghost, shall be forgiven unto men; the Church could not gain any
   one out of all the classes of ungodly sinners who gainsay the gift of
   Christ, and the sanctification of the Church, whether Jews, or
   heathens, or heretics of whatsoever sort, and some even of little
   [2354] knowledge in the Catholic Church itself. But God forbid that the
   Lord should say this: God forbid, I say, that the Truth should say that
   every blasphemy and every word which should be spoken against the Holy
   Ghost, hath no forgiveness neither in this world, neither in the world
   to come.

   10. His will indeed was to exercise us by the difficulty of the
   question, not to deceive us by a false decision. Wherefore there is no
   necessity for any one to think, that every blasphemy or every word
   which is spoken against the Holy Ghost hath no remission; but necessary
   it plainly is, that there should be some certain blasphemy, and some
   word which if it be spoken against the Holy Ghost can never attain
   [2355] to pardon and forgiveness. For if we take it to mean "every
   word," who then can be saved? But if again we think there is no such
   "word," we contradict the Saviour. There is then without doubt some
   certain blasphemy and some word which if it be spoken against the Holy
   Ghost, shall not be forgiven. Now what this word is, it is the Lord's
   will we should enquire; and therefore He hath not expressed it. His
   will, I say, was that it should be enquired into, not denied. For the
   style of the Scriptures is often such, that when anything is so
   expressed as not to be limited either to a universal or particular
   signification, it is not necessary that it should be understood
   universally, and not particularly. This proposition then would be
   expressed in its whole extent, that is, universally, if it were said,
   "All blasphemy [2356] of the Spirit shall not be forgiven;" or,
   "Whosoever speaketh any word whatsoever against the Holy Ghost, it
   shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world
   to come." But it would be expressed partially, that is, particularly,
   if it were said, "Some certain blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be
   forgiven." But because this proposition is laid down neither in a
   universal, nor a particular form (for it is not said, "Every
   blasphemy;" or some certain blasphemy of the Spirit; but only
   indefinitely, "blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be forgiven;" neither
   is it said, "Whosoever speaketh any word whatever," or "whosoever
   speaketh some certain word," but indefinitely, "whosoever speaketh a
   word"), there is no necessity that we should understand "every
   blasphemy and every word;" but necessary it plainly is that the Lord
   designed some kind of blasphemy, and some word to be understood; though
   He would not express it, that, if we should receive any right
   understanding of it by asking, and seeking, and knocking, we might not
   entertain a low esteem of it.

   11. In order to seeing this more plainly, consider that which the same
   Lord also saith of the Jews, "If I had not come and spoken to them,
   they had not had sin." [2357] For this again was not said with any such
   meaning, as if He intended it to be understood that the Jews would have
   been without any sin at all, if He had not come and spoken to them. For
   indeed He found them full of and laden with sins. Wherefore He saith,
   "Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden." [2358] Laden!
   with what, but with the burdens of sins and transgressions of the Law?
   "For the Law entered that sin might abound." [2359] Since then He saith
   Himself in another place, "I came not to call the righteous, but
   sinners to repentance;" [2360] how would "they not have had sin if He
   had not come"? if it be not that this proposition being expressed
   neither universally, nor particularly, but indefinitely, does not
   constrain us to understand it of all sin? But certainly unless we
   understand that there was some sin which they would not have had if
   Christ had not come and spoken unto them, we must say that the
   proposition was false, which God forbid. He doth not say then, "If I
   had not come and spoken unto them, they had had no sin;" lest the Truth
   should lie. Nor again did He say definitely, "If I had not come and
   spoken unto them, they had not had some certain sin;" lest our devout
   earnestness [2361] should not be exercised. For in the full abundance
   of the Holy Scriptures we feed upon the plain parts, we are exercised
   by the obscure: by the one, hunger is driven away, and daintiness
   [2362] by the other. Seeing then that it is not said, "they had had no
   sin," we need not be disturbed, though we acknowledge that the Jews
   would have been sinners, even if the Lord had not come. But yet because
   it is said, "If I had not come, they had not had sin;" it must needs be
   that they contracted, though not all, yet some sin which they had not
   before, from the coming of the Lord. And this verily is that sin, that
   they believed not in Him who was present with and spake to them, and
   that counting Him as an enemy because He spake the truth, they put Him
   besides to death. This sin so great and terrible it is clear they had
   not had if He had not come and spoken to them. As then when we hear the
   words, "They had not had sin;" we do not understand all, but some, sin;
   so when we hear in to-day's lesson, "Blasphemy of the Spirit shall not
   be forgiven;" we understand not all, but a certain kind of blasphemy;
   and when we hear, "Whosoever speaketh a word against the Holy Ghost, it
   shall not be forgiven him;" we ought not to understand every, but some
   certain word.

   12. For in that He saith also in this very text, "But blasphemy of the
   Spirit shall not be forgiven;" surely we must needs understand not
   blasphemy of every spirit, but the Holy Spirit. And though He had not
   expressed this anywhere else more plainly, who could be so silly as to
   understand it in any other way? According to the same rule of speech is
   this expression also understood, "Except a man be born of water and of
   the Spirit." [2363] For He doth not say in that place, and of the Holy
   Spirit; yet this is understood. Nor because He said of water and of the
   Spirit, is any one forced to understand it of every spirit. Wherefore
   when you hear, "But the blasphemy of the Spirit shall not be forgiven;"
   as you must not understand it of every spirit, so not of every
   blasphemy against the Spirit.

   13. I see that you are now wishing to hear, since it is not every
   blasphemy of the Spirit, what that blasphemy is which shall not be
   forgiven, and what that word is, since it is not every word which if it
   shall be spoken against the Holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven neither
   in this world, neither in the world to come. And for my part I should
   be willing to tell you at once, what you are so very intently waiting
   to hear; but bear for a while the delay which a more careful diligence
   requires, till by the Lord's assistance I shall unfold the whole
   meaning of the passage before us. Now the other two Evangelists, Mark
   and Luke, when they spake of the same thing, did not say "blasphemy" or
   "a word," that we might understand it not of every blasphemy, but of
   some sort of blasphemy; not every word, but some certain word. What
   then did they say? In Mark it is thus written, "Verily I say unto you,
   all sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies,
   where-withsoever they shall blaspheme. But he that shall blaspheme
   against the Holy Ghost, hath never forgiveness, but shall be held
   guilty of an eternal offence." [2364] In Luke it is thus: "And
   whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of Man, it shall be
   forgiven him; but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it
   shall not be forgiven." [2365] Is there any departure from the truth of
   the same proposition because of some diversity in the expression? For
   indeed there is no other reason why the Evangelists do not relate the
   same things in the same way, but that we may learn thereby to prefer
   things to words, not words to things, and to seek for nothing else in
   the speaker, but for his intention, to convey which only the words are
   used. For what real difference is there whether it is said, "Blasphemy
   of the Spirit shall not be forgiven;" or "he that blasphemeth against
   the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him." Except perhaps that the
   same thing is declared more plainly in this last than in the other
   form; and so one Evangelist does not overthrow, but explains the other.
   Now "blasphemy of the Spirit" is an unevident [2366] expression;
   because it is not directly said what spirit; for every spirit is not
   the Holy Spirit. Thus it might be called "blasphemy of the spirit,"
   when a man blasphemes with the spirit; as that may be called "prayer of
   the spirit," when one prays with the spirit. Whence the Apostle says,
   "I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding
   also." [2367] But when it is said, "he that shall blaspheme against the
   Holy Ghost," these ambiguities are removed. So the expression, "hath
   never forgiveness, but shall be held guilty of an eternal offence;"
   what is it, but what according to Matthew is expressed, "it shall not
   be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come"?
   The very same idea is expressed in different words and different forms
   of speech. And what is in Matthew, "Whosoever speaketh a word against
   the Holy Ghost," that we might not understand it of anything but
   blasphemy, others have more clearly expressed, "He that shall blaspheme
   against the Holy Ghost." Yet the same thing is said by all; nor did any
   one of them depart from the intention of the Speaker, for the sake of
   understanding which only are words spoken, and written, and read, and
   heard.

   14. But one may say, See I have admitted and understood that where the
   word "blasphemy" is used, and neither all, nor some certain blasphemy
   expressed, it may be understood either of all, or of some certain
   blasphemy, but not necessarily of all; but again if it be not
   understood of some, that that which is said would be untrue: so again
   if it is not said every or some certain word, it is not necessary that
   every word should be understood, but unless some word be understood, in
   no way can what is said be true. But when we read, "He that shall
   blaspheme," how can I understand any certain blasphemy, when the word
   "blasphemy" is not used, or any certain word, when the word "word" is
   not used, but it seems to be said as it were generally, "He that shall
   blaspheme." To this objection [2368] I reply thus. If it were said in
   this passage also, "He that shall blaspheme with any kind of blasphemy
   whatever against the Holy Ghost," there would be no reason why we
   should think that some particular blasphemy was to be sought for, when
   we ought rather to understand all blasphemy; but because all blasphemy
   could not be meant, lest the hope of forgiveness in case of their
   amendment should be taken away from heathens, and Jews, and heretics,
   and all kinds of men, who by their divers errors and contradictions
   blaspheme against the Holy Ghost; it remains without a doubt, that in
   the passage where it is written, "He that shall blaspheme against the
   Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness," he must be meant, not who hath in
   any way whatever blasphemed; but he who hath blasphemed in such a
   particular way, that he can never be pardoned.

   15. For as in that it is said, "God tempteth no man," [2369] it is not
   to be understood that God tempteth no man with any kind, but only not
   with some certain kind of temptation; lest that be false, which is
   written, "The Lord your God tempteth you;" [2370] and lest we deny that
   Christ is God, or say that the Gospel is false, when we read that He
   asked His disciple "tempting him; but He Himself knew what He would
   do." [2371] For there is a temptation which induces to sin, with which
   "God tempteth no man," and there is a temptation which only proves our
   faith, with which even God vouchsafes to tempt. So when we hear, "He
   that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost," we must not take it of
   every kind of blasphemy, as neither in the other place, of every kind
   of temptation.

   16. So again when we hear, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be
   saved;" [2372] we do not of course understand it of one who believes in
   such a way "as the devils believe and tremble;" [2373] nor of those who
   receive baptism in such sort as Simon Magus, [2374] who though he could
   be baptized, could not be saved. As then when He said, "He that
   believeth and is baptized shall be saved," He had not in his view all
   who believe and are baptized, but some only; those, to wit, who are
   settled in that faith, which, according to the Apostle's distinction,
   "worketh by love:" [2375] so when he said, "He that shall blaspheme
   against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness," he did not intend every
   kind, but a specific sin of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, by which
   whosoever shall be bound, he shall never by any remission be loosed.

   17. That expression also of His, "He that eateth My Flesh and drinketh
   My Blood dwelleth in Me, and I in him," [2376] how must we understand?
   Can we include in these words those even of whom the Apostle says,
   "that they eat and drink judgment to themselves;" [2377] when they eat
   this flesh and drink this blood? What! did Judas the impious seller and
   betrayer of his Master [2378] (though, as Luke the Evangelist declares
   more plainly, he ate and drank with the rest of His disciples this
   first Sacrament of His body and blood, consecrated [2379] by the Lord's
   hands), did he "dwell in Christ and Christ in him"? Do so many, in
   fine, who either in hypocrisy eat that flesh and drink that blood, or
   who after they have eaten and drunk become apostate, do they "dwell in
   Christ or Christ in them"? Yet assuredly there is a certain manner of
   eating that Flesh and drinking that Blood, in which whosoever eateth
   and drinketh, "he dwelleth in Christ and Christ in him." As then he
   doth not "dwell in Christ and Christ in him," who "eateth the Flesh and
   drinketh the Blood of Christ" in any manner whatsoever, but only in
   some certain manner, to which He doubtless had regard when He spake
   these words. So in this expression also, "He that shall blaspheme
   against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness," he is not guilty of
   this unpardonable sin, who shall blaspheme in any way whatever, but in
   that particular way, which it is His will, who uttered this true and
   terrible sentence, that we should seek out and understand.

   18. Now as to what that mode, or immoderateness [2380] rather, of
   blasphemy is, what that particular blasphemy, and what that word
   against the Holy Ghost, the order of my discourse requires me to say
   what I think, and not to put off any longer your expectation which has
   been so long but so necessarily deferred. Ye know, Dearly beloved, that
   in that invisible and incorruptible Trinity, which our faith and the
   Church Catholic maintains and preaches, God the Father is not the
   Father of the Holy Spirit, but of the Son; and that God the Son is not
   the Son of the Holy Spirit, but of the Father; but that God the Holy
   Spirit is the Spirit not of the Father only, or of the Son only, but of
   the Father and the Son. And that this Trinity, although the [2381]
   Property and particular [2382] Subsistence [2383] of each person is
   preserved, is yet, because of the undivided and inseparable Essence or
   Nature of Eternity, [2384] Truth, and Goodness, not three Gods but One
   God. And by this means, according to our capacity, and as far as it is
   granted us to see these things "through a glass darkly," especially
   being such as we now are, there is conveyed to [2385] us the idea of
   Origination [2386] in the Father, Nativity in the Son, and the
   Communion of the Father and the Son in the Holy Spirit, and in the
   Three Equality. By That then which is the Bond of communion [2387]
   between the Father and the Son, it is Their pleasure that we should
   have communion both among ourselves and with Them, and to gather us
   together in one by that same Gift, which One They both have, that is,
   by the Holy Spirit, at once God and the Gift of God. For in This are we
   reconciled to the Divinity, and take delight in It. For what would the
   knowledge of whatever good we know profit us, unless we also loved it?
   But as it is by the truth that we learn, so is it by charity that we
   love, that so we may attain also to a fuller knowledge, and enjoy in
   blessedness what we know. "Love moreover is shed abroad in our hearts
   by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us." [2388] And because it is
   through sin that we are alienated from the possession of true good,
   "Love covereth a multitude of sins." [2389] So then the Father is
   Himself the True Origin [2390] to the Son, who is the Truth, and the
   Son is the Truth, originating [2391] from the True Father, and the Holy
   Spirit is Goodness, shed abroad [2392] from the Good Father and the
   Good Son; but in all Three the Divinity is equal, and the Unity
   Inseparable.

   19. First then in order to our receiving eternal life which shall be
   given at the last, there comes to us a gift from God's goodness from
   the beginning of our faith, to wit, the remission of sins. For while
   they remain, there remains in some sort enmity against God, and
   alienation from Him, which comes from what is evil in us; since
   Scripture does not speak falsely, which says, "Your sins separate
   between you and God." [2393] He does not then bestow on us His good
   things, except He take away our evil things. And the former increase in
   proportion as the latter are diminished; nor will the one be perfected,
   till the other be brought to an end. But now that the Lord Jesus
   forgives sins by the Holy Ghost, just as by the Holy Ghost He casts out
   devils, may be understood by this, that after His Resurrection from the
   dead, when He had said to His disciples, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost,"
   He immediately subjoined, "Whosesoever sins ye remit, they shall be
   remitted unto them, and whosesoever sins ye retain, they shall be
   retained." [2394] For that regeneration also, in which there is a
   remission of all past sins, is wrought by the Holy Ghost, as the Lord
   saith, "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot
   enter into the kingdom of God." [2395] But it is one thing to be born
   of the Spirit, another to be nourished by the Spirit; just as it is one
   thing to be born of the flesh, which happens when the mother is
   delivered of her child; another to be nourished by the flesh, which
   happens when she gives suck to her infant, who turns himself that he
   may drink with pleasure thither whence he was born, to have life; that
   he may receive the support of life from thence, whence he received the
   beginning of his birth. We must believe then that the first blessing of
   God's goodness in the Holy Ghost is the remission of sins. Whence the
   preaching of John the Baptist, who was sent as the forerunner of the
   Lord, also begins with it. For thus it is written, "In those days came
   John the Baptist preaching in the wilderness of Judæa, saying, Repent
   ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." [2396] Hence too the
   beginning of our Lord's preaching, as we read, "From that time Jesus
   began to preach and to say, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at
   hand." [2397] Now John, amongst the other things which he spake to
   those who came to be baptized by him, said, "I indeed baptize you with
   water unto repentance; but He that cometh after me is mightier than I,
   whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; He shall baptize you with the Holy
   Ghost and with fire." [2398] The Lord also said, "John truly baptized
   with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days
   hence," [2399] even at Pentecost. Now as to John's expression, "with
   fire," though tribulation also might be understood, which believers
   were to suffer for the name of Christ; yet may we reasonably think that
   the same Holy Spirit is signified also under the name of "fire." [2400]
   Wherefore when He came it is said, "And there appeared unto them cloven
   tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them." [2401] Hence
   also the Lord Himself said, "I am come to send fire on the earth."
   [2402] Hence also the Apostle saith, "Fervent in the spirit;" [2403]
   for from Him comes the fervour of love. "For it is shed abroad in our
   hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us." [2404] And the
   contrary to this fervour is what the Lord said, "The love of many shall
   wax cold." [2405] Now perfect love is the perfect gift of the Holy
   Spirit. But the first "gift" is that which is concerned with the
   remission of sins; by which blessing "we are delivered from the power
   of darkness;" [2406] and the prince of this world, [2407] who worketh
   in the children of disobedience" [2408] by no other power than the
   fellowship and the bond of sin, is "cast out" by our faith. For by the
   Holy Spirit, by whom the people of God are gathered together into one,
   is the unclean spirit who is divided against himself cast out.

   20. Against this gratuitous gift, against this grace of God, does the
   impenitent heart speak. This impenitence then is "the blasphemy of the
   Spirit, which shall not be forgiven, neither in this world, neither in
   the world to come." For against the Holy Spirit, by whom they whose
   sins are all forgiven are baptized, and whom the Church hath received,
   that "whosesoever sins she remits, they may be remitted," does he
   speak, whether in the thought only, or also in the tongue, a very
   heinous and exceedingly ungodly word, who "when the patience of God
   leadeth him to repentance, after his hardness and impenitent heart
   treasureth up unto himself wrath against the day of wrath, and
   revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render to every
   man according to his deeds." [2409] This impenitence then, for so by
   some one general name may we call both this blasphemy and the word
   against the Holy Ghost which hath no forgiveness for ever; this
   impenitence, I say, against which both the herald and the Judge cried
   out, saying, "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand;" [2410]
   against which the Lord first opened the mouth of the Gospel preaching,
   and against which He foretold that the same Gospel was to be preached
   in all the world, when He said to His disciples after His resurrection
   from the dead, "it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead
   the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins should be
   preached in His Name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem:" [2411]
   this impenitence, in one word, hath no forgiveness "neither in this
   world, nor in the world to come;" for that repentance only obtaineth
   forgiveness in this world, that it may have its effect in the world to
   come.

   21. But this impenitence or impenitent heart may not be pronounced
   [2412] upon, as long as a man lives in the flesh. For we are not to
   despair of any so long as "the patience of God leadeth the ungodly to
   repentance," and doth not hurry him out of this life; "God, who willeth
   not the death of a sinner, but that he should return from his ways and
   live." [2413] He is a heathen today; but how knowest thou whether he
   may not be a Christian to-morrow? He is a heretic to-day; but what if
   to-morrow he follow the Catholic truth? He is a schismatic to-day; but
   what if to-morrow he embrace Catholic peace? What if they, whom thou
   observest now in any kind of error that can be, and whom thou
   condemnest as in most desperate case, what if before they end this
   life, they repent and find the true life in that which is to come?
   Wherefore, Brethren, let also what the Apostle says urge you to this.
   "Judge nothing before the time." [2414] For this blasphemy of the
   Spirit, for which there is no forgiveness (which I have understood to
   be not every kind of blasphemy, but a particular sort, and that as I
   have said or discovered, or even as I think clearly shown to be the
   case, the persevering hardness of an impenitent heart), cannot be taken
   hold of in any one, I repeat it, as long as he is still in this life.

   22. And let it not seem absurd, that whereas a man who perseveres in
   hardened impenitence even to the end of this life, speaks long and much
   against this grace of the Holy Spirit; yet the Gospel has called this
   so long contradiction of an impenitent heart, as though it were
   something of short duration, "a word," saying, "Whosoever speaketh a
   word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever
   speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither
   in this world, neither in the world to come." For though this blasphemy
   be long continued, and made up of, and drawn out at length in very many
   words, yet it is the manner of Scripture to call even many words "a
   word." For no prophet ever spoke one word only; yet we read, "the word
   which came to such and such a prophet." And the Apostle says, "Let the
   elders be counted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour
   in the word and doctrine." [2415] He does not say, "in words," but, "in
   the word." And St. James, "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers
   only." [2416] He again does not say, "of the words," but, "of the
   word;" although so many words out of the Holy Scriptures are read, and
   spoken, and heard in the Church at her celebrations and solemnities. As
   therefore, how long a time soever any of us have laboured in preaching
   the Gospel, he is not called a preacher of the words, but of the word;
   and how long time soever any of you may have attentively and diligently
   listened to our preaching, he is called a most earnest "hearer" not of
   the words, but "of the word;" so after the style of the Scripture and
   the custom of the Church, whoso throughout his whole life in the flesh,
   to whatever length it may be extended, shall have spoken no matter how
   many words, whether by mouth, or the thought only with an impenitent
   heart, against that remission of sins which is granted in the Church,
   he speaks "a word" against the Holy Ghost.

   23. Therefore not only every word spoken against the Son of Man, but,
   in fact, every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; because
   where there is not this sin of an impenitent heart against the Holy
   Ghost, by whom sins are remitted in the Church, all other sins are
   forgiven. But how shall that sin be forgiven, which hinders the
   forgiveness of other sins also? All sins then are forgiven to them in
   whom is not this sin, which shall never be forgiven; but to him in whom
   it is, since this sin is never forgiven, neither are other sins
   forgiven; because the remission of all is hindered by the bond of this
   one. It is not then that "whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of
   Man shall be forgiven," but "whoso speaketh against the Holy Ghost
   shall not be forgiven," for that in the Trinity the Holy Ghost is
   greater than the Son, which no heretic even has ever maintained; but
   since whosoever he be that resisteth the truth and blasphemeth the
   Truth, which is Christ, even after such a manifestation of Himself
   among men, as that the Word who is the Son of Man and very Christ,
   "became flesh and dwelt among us;" if he have not also spoken that word
   of the impenitent heart against the Holy Ghost, of whom it is said,
   "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit;" [2417] and again,
   "Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whosesoever sins ye remit they are remitted
   unto them;" [2418] that is, if he shall repent, he shall thereby
   receive the gift of the remission of all his sins, and of this also,
   that he "hath spoken a word against the Son of Man," because to the sin
   of ignorance, or obstinacy, or blasphemy of whatever kind, he hath not
   added the sin of impenitence against the gift of God, and the grace of
   regeneration or reconciliation, which is conferred in the Church by the
   Holy Spirit.

   24. Wherefore, neither must we imagine, as some do, that the word which
   is spoken against the Son of Man is forgiven, but that which is spoken
   against the Holy Ghost is not forgiven, because Christ became the Son
   of Man by reason of His assuming flesh, in which respect the Holy Ghost
   of course is greater, who in His Own Substance is equal to the Father
   and the Only-begotten Son according to His Divinity, according to which
   also the Only-begotten Son Himself is equal to the Father and the Holy
   Spirit. For if this were the reason, surely nothing would have been
   said of any other kind of blasphemy, that that only might appear
   capable of forgiveness, which is spoken against the Son of Man,
   regarded only as man. But forasmuch as it is first said, "All manner of
   sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men;" [2419] which in another
   Evangelist is also thus expressed, "All sins shall be forgiven unto the
   sons of men, and blasphemies wherewithsoever they shall blaspheme;"
   [2420] without doubt, that blasphemy also which is spoken against the
   Father is included in that general expression; and yet that alone is
   laid down as unpardonable, which is spoken against the Holy Ghost.
   What! did the Father also take the form of a servant, that in this
   respect the Holy Ghost should be greater than He? No surely: but after
   the universal mention of all sins and of all blasphemy, He wished to
   express more prominently the blasphemy which is spoken against the Son
   of Man for this reason, because although men should be even bound in
   that sin which He mentioned when He said, "If I had not come and spoken
   to them, they had not had sin:" [2421] which sin also in the Gospel
   according to John He shows to be a very grievous one, when He says of
   the Holy Spirit Himself, when He promised that He would send Him, "He
   shall reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment:
   of sin, because they believed not on Me:" [2422] yet if that hardness
   of the impenitent heart have not spoken a word against the Holy Ghost,
   even this which is spoken against the Son of Man shall be forgiven.

   25. Here perhaps some one may ask, "whether the Holy Ghost only
   forgiveth sins, and not the Father and the Son also?" I answer, Both
   the Father and the Son forgive them. For the Son Himself saith of the
   Father, "If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
   also forgive you." [2423] And we say to Him in the Lord's Prayer, "Our
   Father, which art in heaven." [2424] And amongst the other petitions we
   ask this, saying, "Forgive us our debts." [2425] And again of Himself
   He saith, "That ye may know that the Son of Man hath power on earth to
   forgive sins." [2426] "If then," you will say, "The Father, the Son,
   and the Holy Spirit forgive sins, why is that impenitence which shall
   never be forgiven, said to relate only to the blasphemy of the Spirit,
   as though he who should be bound in this sin of impenitence should seem
   to resist the gift of the Holy Spirit, because by that gift is wrought
   the remission of sins?" Now on this point, I will also ask, Whether
   Christ only cast out devils, or the Father and the Holy Spirit also?
   For if Christ only, what means His saying, "The Father that dwelleth in
   Me, He doeth the works." [2427] For so it is said, "He doeth the
   works," as if the Son doeth them not, but the Father who dwelleth in
   the Son. Why then in another place doth He say, "My Father worketh
   hitherto, and I work." [2428] And a little after, "For what things
   soever He doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise." [2429] But when in
   another place He says, "If I had not done amongst them the works which
   none other man did," [2430] He speaks as if He did them alone. Now if
   these things are so expressed, as that nevertheless the works of the
   Father and the Son are inseparable, what must we believe of the Holy
   Spirit, but that He also worketh equally with them? For in that very
   place, from which this question arose which we are discussing, when the
   Son was casting out devils, He yet said, "If I in the Holy Spirit cast
   out devils, then the kingdom of God is come unto you." [2431]

   26. And here perhaps one may say, "That the Holy Spirit is rather given
   by the Father and the Son, than that He worketh anything by His own
   will, and that this is the scope of the words, "In the Holy Spirit I
   cast out devils," because not the Spirit Himself, but Christ in the
   Spirit, did it; so that the expression, "I cast out in the Holy
   Spirit," might be understood as if it were said, "I cast out by the
   Holy Spirit." For this is the usual style of the Scriptures, "They
   killed in the sword," that is, by the sword. They "burnt in the fire,"
   [2432] that is, by the fire. "And Joshua took knives of flints, in
   which to circumcise," that is, by which to circumcise, "the children of
   Israel." [2433] But let those who on this account take from the Holy
   Spirit His proper power, look to that which we read to have been spoken
   by the Lord, "The Spirit bloweth where It listeth." [2434] And as to
   what the Apostle says, "But all these worketh that one and the
   self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as He will;" [2435]
   it might be feared, lest one imagine that the Father and the Son do not
   work them: whereas amongst these works he has expressly mentioned both
   the "gifts of healings," and the "workings of miracles," in which
   surely is included also the driving out of devils. But when he adds the
   words, "Dividing to every man severally as He will;" does he not
   clearly show also the Power of the Holy Spirit, yet as plainly
   inseparable from the Father and the Son? If then these things are so
   expressed, as that notwithstanding the operation of the Trinity is
   understood to be inseparable: so that when the operation of the Father
   is spoken of, it is understood that He does not exercise it without the
   Son, and the Holy Spirit; and when the operation of the Son is spoken
   of, it is not without the Father and the Holy Spirit; and when the
   operation of the Holy Spirit is spoken of, it is not without the Father
   and the Son; it is sufficiently clear to those who have a sound faith,
   or who even understand as they best can, both that the words, "He doeth
   the works," [2436] are spoken of the Father, in that from Him is also
   [2437] the first principle of the works, from whom is the existence of
   the Persons who co-operate in working: for that both the Son is born of
   Him, and the Holy Spirit proceedeth from Him, as the First Beginning,
   of whom the Son is born, and with whom He hath one Spirit in common;
   and again that when the Lord said, "If I had not done among them the
   works which none other did," [2438] He did not speak in reference to
   the Father and the Spirit, as that They did not co-operate with Him in
   those works; but to men by whom we read of many miracles having been
   done, but by none such miracles as the Son did. And what the Apostle
   says of the Holy Spirit, "But all these worketh that one and the
   self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as He will," is not
   said, because the Father and the Son do not co-operate with Him; but
   because in these works there are not many spirits, but One Spirit, and
   in His divers operations He is not diverse from Himself.

   27. [2439] And yet it is not without cause, but with reason and with
   truth said, that the Father, and not the Son and the Holy Spirit, said,
   "Thou art My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." [2440]
   Nevertheless, we do not deny that the Son and the Holy Spirit
   co-operated in working this miracle of the voice sounding from heaven,
   though we know that it belongs to the Person of the Father only. For
   though the Son bearing flesh, was there conversing with men on earth,
   He was not the less on that account in the Bosom of the Father also as
   the Only-Begotten Word, when that Voice came out of the cloud; nor
   could it be either wisely and through the Spirit [2441] believed, that
   God the Father separated the operation of these audible and passing
   words from the co-operation of His Wisdom and His Spirit. In the same
   way when we say most rightly, that not the Father, nor the Holy Spirit,
   but the Son walked upon the sea, who only had that flesh and those feet
   which rested on the waves; [2442] yet who would deny that the Father
   and the Holy Spirit co-operated in the work of so great a miracle? For
   so again we say most truly that the Son only took this our flesh, not
   the Father, nor the Holy Spirit, and yet he hath no true wisdom who
   denies that the Father, or the Holy Spirit co-operated in the work of
   His Incarnation which belongeth only to the Son. So also we say that
   neither the Father, nor the Son, but the Holy Spirit only appeared both
   in the "form of a dove," [2443] and in "tongues as it were of fire;"
   [2444] and gave to those to whom He came the power to tell in many and
   various tongues "the wonderful works of God;" and yet from this miracle
   which regards the Holy Spirit only, we cannot separate the co-operation
   of the Father and the Only-Begotten Word. So also the Whole Trinity
   work the works of each several Person in the Trinity, the Two
   co-operating in the work of the Other, through a perfect harmony of
   operation in the Three, and not through any deficiency of the power to
   work effectually in One. And since this is so, hence it is that the
   Lord Jesus cast out devils in the Holy Spirit. Not that He was not able
   to accomplish this alone, or that He assumed that aid as being
   insufficient for this work; but it was meet that the spirit who is
   divided against himself should be driven out by that Spirit, which the
   Father and the Son who are not divided in themselves have in common.

   28. And thus sins, because they are not forgiven out of the Church,
   must be forgiven by that Spirit, by whom the Church is gathered
   together into one. In fact, if any one out of the Church repent him of
   his sins, and for this so great sin whereby he is an alien from the
   Church of God, has an heart impenitent, what doth that other repentance
   profit him? seeing by this alone he speaketh a word against the Holy
   Ghost, whereby he is alienated from the Church, which hath received
   this gift, that in her remission of sins should be given in the Holy
   Ghost? Which remission though it be the work of the Whole Trinity, is
   yet understood specially to belong to the Holy Spirit. For He is the
   Spirit of the adoption of sons, "in whom we cry Abba, Father;" [2445]
   that we may be able to say to Him, "Forgive us our debts." [2446] And,
   "Hereby we know" as the Apostle John says, "that Christ dwelleth in us,
   by His Spirit which He hath given us." [2447] "The Spirit Itself
   beareth witness with our spirit that we are the children of God."
   [2448] For to Him appertains the fellowship, by which we are made the
   one body of the One only Son of God. Whence it is written, "If there be
   therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
   fellowship of the Spirit." [2449] With a view to this fellowship they
   to whom He first came spake with the tongues of all nations. Because as
   by tongues the fellowship of mankind is more closely united; so it
   behoved that this fellowship of the sons of God and members of Christ
   which was to be among all nations should be signified by the tongues of
   all nations; that as at that time he was known to have received the
   Holy Ghost, who spake with the tongues of all nations; so now he should
   acknowledge that he has received the Holy Ghost, who is held by the
   bond of the peace of the Church, which is spread throughout all
   nations. Whence the Apostle says, "Endeavouring to keep the unity of
   the Spirit in the bond of peace." [2450]

   29. Now that He is the Spirit of the Father, the Son Himself saith, "He
   proceedeth from the Father." [2451] And in another place, "For it is
   not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in
   you." [2452] And that He is the Spirit of the Son also the Apostle
   saith, "God hath sent the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying,
   Abba Father;" [2453] that is, making you cry. For it is we that cry;
   but in Him, that is, by His shedding abroad love in our hearts, without
   which whoso crieth, crieth in vain. Whence he says again, "If any man
   have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His." [2454] To which
   Person then in the Trinity could the communion of this fellowship
   peculiarly appertain, but to that Spirit which is common to the Father
   and the Son?

   30. That they who have separated from the Church have not this Spirit,
   the Apostle Jude has declared most plainly, saying, "Who separate
   themselves, natural, having not the Spirit." [2455] Whence the Apostle
   Paul reproving those even in the Church itself, who by the names of
   men, though having a place in her unity, were raising a kind of schism,
   says amongst other things, "But the natural man perceiveth not the
   things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither
   can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned." [2456] This
   shows his meaning, "doth not perceive," that is doth not receive the
   word of knowledge. These as having a place in the Church, he speaks of
   as babes, not yet spiritual, but still carnal, and such as are to be
   fed with milk, not with meat. "Even," he says, "as unto babes in
   Christ, have I given you milk and not meat; for hitherto ye were not
   able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able." [2457] When we say, "not
   yet," we must not despair, if that which is "not yet" tends to be. For
   he says, "ye are yet carnal." And showing how it is that they are
   carnal, he says, "For whereas there is among you envying, and strife,
   and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?" And again more
   plainly, "For while one saith, I am of Paul, and another, I of Apollos,
   are ye not carnal? Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers
   by whom ye believed?" [2458] These then, that is, Paul and Apollos,
   agreed together in the unity of the Spirit and the bond of peace; and
   yet because the Corinthians began to divide them among themselves, and
   "to be puffed up for one against another," they are said to be
   men--carnal and natural men, not able to receive the things of the
   Spirit of God; and yet because they are not separated from the Church,
   they are called "babes in Christ;" for indeed he desired that they
   should be either Angels, or even Gods, whom he reproved because they
   were men, that is, in those contentions, "They savoured not the things
   which be of God, but the things which be of men." [2459] But of those
   who are separated from the Church it is not merely said, "perceiving
   not the things of the Spirit of God," lest it should be referred to the
   perception of knowledge; but it is said, "Having not the Spirit." For
   it does not follow, that he who hath it, should also by knowledge
   perceive what he hath.

   31. The "babes" then "in Christ" who have yet place in the Church, who
   are still natural and carnal, and cannot "perceive," that is,
   understand and know what they have, have this Spirit. For how could
   they be babes in Christ except they were born anew of the Holy Spirit?
   Nor ought it to seem any wonder that one may have something, and yet
   not know what he hath. For to say nothing of the Divinity of the
   Almighty, and the Unity of the Unchangeable Trinity, who can easily
   perceive by knowledge what the soul is; and yet who is there that hath
   not a soul? Finally, that we may know most certainly that "babes in
   Christ," who do not "perceive the things of the Spirit of God," have
   notwithstanding the Spirit of God; let us look how the Apostle Paul,
   when a little while after he is rebuking them, saith, "Know ye not that
   ye are the temples of God, and the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?"
   [2460] This surely he would in no wise say to those who are separated
   from the Church, who are described as "having not the Spirit."

   32. But neither can he be said to be in the Church, and to belong to
   that fellowship of the Spirit, who is mixed up with Christ's sheep by a
   bodily intercourse only in deceitfulness of heart. For the "Holy Spirit
   of discipline will flee deceit." [2461] Wherefore whosoever are
   baptized in the congregations or separations rather [2462] of
   schismatics or heretics, although they have not been born again of the
   Spirit, like as it were to Ishmael, who was Abraham's son after the
   flesh; not like Isaac, who was his son after the Spirit, [2463] because
   by promise; yet when they come to the Catholic Church, and are joined
   to the fellowship of the Spirit which without the Church they beyond
   doubt had not, the washing of the flesh is not repeated in their case.
   For "this form of godliness" was not wanting to them even when they
   were without; but there is added to them "the Unity of the Spirit in
   the bond of peace," which cannot be given but within. Before they were
   Catholics indeed, they were as they of whom the Apostle says, "Having a
   form of godliness, but denying the power thereof." [2464] For the
   visible form of the branch may exist even when separated from the vine;
   but the invisible life of the root cannot be had, but in the vine.
   Wherefore the bodily sacraments, which even they who are separated from
   the Unity of Christ's Body bear and celebrate, may give "the form of
   godliness;" but the invisible and spiritual power of godliness cannot
   in any wise be in them, just as sensation does not accompany a man's
   limb, when it is amputated from the body.

   33. And since this is so, remission of sins, seeing it is not given but
   by the Holy Spirit, can only be given in that Church which hath the
   Holy Spirit. For this is the effect of the remission of sins, that the
   prince of sin, the spirit who is divided against himself, should no
   more reign in us, and that being delivered from the power of the
   unclean spirit, we should thenceforward be made the temple of the Holy
   Spirit, and receive Him, by whom we are cleansed through receiving
   pardon, to dwell in us, to work, increase, and perfect righteousness.
   For at His first coming, when they who had received Him spake with the
   tongues of all nations, and the Apostle Peter addressed those who were
   present in amazement, they were pricked in heart, and said to Peter and
   to the rest of the Apostles, "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" show
   us. "And Peter said to them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you
   in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall
   receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." [2465] In the Church truly in
   which was the Holy Ghost, were both brought to pass, that is, both the
   remission of sins, and the receiving of this gift. And therefore was it
   "In the Name of Jesus Christ;" because when He promised the same Holy
   Ghost; He said, "Whom the Father will send in My Name." [2466] For the
   Spirit dwelleth in no man without the Father and the Son; as neither
   doth the Son without the Father and the Holy Spirit, nor the Father
   without them. Their indwelling is inseparable, as their operation is
   inseparable; but sometimes they manifest themselves separately by
   symbols [2467] borrowed from the creatures, not in their own substance;
   just as they are pronounced separately by the voice in syllables which
   occupy separately their own spaces, and yet they are not separated from
   each other by any intervals, or moments of time. For they never can be
   pronounced together, whereas they can never exist, except together. But
   as I have already said, and not once only, the remission of sins,
   whereby the kingdom of the spirit which is divided against himself is
   overthrown and driven out, and the fellowship of the unity of the
   Church of God, out of which this remission of sins is not, are regarded
   as the peculiar work of the Holy Spirit, with the cooperation doubtless
   of the Father and the Son, because the Holy Spirit is Himself in some
   sort the fellowship of the Father and the Son. For the Father is not
   possessed [2468] as Father by the Son and the Holy Spirit in common;
   because He is not the Father of Both. And the Son is not possessed as
   Son by the Father and the Holy Spirit in common; because He is not the
   Son of Both. But the Holy Spirit is possessed as the Spirit by the
   Father and the Son in common, because He is the One Spirit of Both.

   34. Whosoever therefore shall be guilty of impenitence against the
   Spirit, in whom the unity and fellowship of the communion of the Church
   is gathered together, shall never have forgiveness; because he has
   stopped the source of forgiveness against himself, and deservedly shall
   he be condemned with the spirit, which is divided against himself, who
   is himself also divided against the Holy Spirit which is not divided
   against Himself. And of this the very testimonies of the Gospel warn
   us, would we with good attention search them. For according to Luke the
   Lord does not say, "That he who blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost
   shall not be forgiven:" in that place where He is answering those who
   said that He cast out devils by the prince of the devils. Whence it
   would seem that this was not said once only by the Lord; but we must
   not carelessly pass over the consideration of the occasion on which
   this last also was spoken. For He was speaking of those who should have
   confessed or denied Him before men, when He said, "Also I say unto you,
   Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him shall the Son of Man also
   confess before the Angels of God. But he that denieth Me before men,
   shall be denied before the angels of God." [2469] And lest from this
   the salvation of the Apostle Peter should be despaired of, he
   immediately subjoined, "And whosoever shall speak a word against the
   Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but unto him that blasphemeth
   against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven; [2470] blasphemeth,"
   that is, with that blasphemy of an impenitent heart, by which
   resistance is made to remission of sins which is granted in the Church
   by the Holy Ghost. And this blasphemy Peter had not, who presently
   repented, when "he wept bitterly," [2471] and who after he had overcome
   the spirit who is divided against himself, and who had desired to "have
   him to harass him," [2472] and against whom the "Lord prayed for him
   that his faith might not fail," even received the Very Holy Spirit whom
   he resisted not, that not only his sin might be forgiven him, but that
   through him remission of sins might be preached and dispensed.

   35. And in the narrative of the two other Evangelists, the occasion of
   speaking out this sentence of the blasphemy of the Spirit arose from
   the mention of the unclean spirit, who is divided against himself. For
   it had been said of the Lord, that "He cast out devils by the prince of
   the devils." In that place the Lord says, that "by the Holy Spirit He
   casteth out devils," that so the spirit who is not divided against
   Himself may overcome and cast out him who is divided against himself;
   but that that man would abide in his perdition, who refuses through
   impenitence to pass over into His peace, who is not divided against
   Himself. For thus runs the narrative of Mark; "Verily I say unto you,
   All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies
   wherewith soever they shall blaspheme; but he that shall blaspheme
   against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness, but shall be held guilty
   of an eternal offence." [2473] When he had delivered these words of the
   Lord, he then subjoined his own, saying, "Because they said He hath an
   unclean spirit;" [2474] that He might show that the cause of His saying
   this arose hence, because they had said that "He cast out devils by
   Beelzebub the prince of the devils." Not that this was a blasphemy
   which shall not be forgiven, forasmuch as even this shall be forgiven,
   if a right repentance follow it; but because, as I have said, there
   arose hence a cause for that sentence to be delivered by the Lord,
   since mention had been made of the unclean spirit whom the Lord shows
   to be divided against himself, because of the Holy Spirit who is not
   only not divided against Himself, but who also makes those whom He
   gathers together undivided, by forgiving those sins which are divided
   against themselves, and by inhabiting those who are cleansed, that it
   may be with them, as it is written in the Acts of the Apostles, "The
   multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul."
   [2475] And this gift of forgiveness none resists, but he who has the
   hardness of an impenitent heart. For in another place also the Jews
   said of the Lord that He had a devil, [2476] yet He spake nothing there
   of the blasphemy of the Holy Spirit; because they did not so bring
   forward the mention of the unclean spirit as that he could be shown out
   of their own mouths to be divided against himself, as Beelzebub, by
   whom they said that devils could be cast out.

   36. But in this passage according to Matthew, the Lord far more plainly
   explained what he intended to be understood here; namely, that he it is
   who speaks a word against the Holy Ghost, who with an impenitent heart
   resists the Unity of the Church, where in the Holy Spirit is given the
   remission of sins. For this spirit they have not, as has been said
   already, who even though they bear and handle [2477] the sacraments of
   Christ, are separated from His congregation. For when He spoke of the
   division of Satan against Satan, and how that He Himself cast out
   devils by the Holy Spirit, that Spirit, namely, which is not, as the
   other, divided against Himself; lest any one should think because of
   those who gather together their irregular assemblies [2478] under the
   Name of Christ, but without His fold, that the kingdom of Christ also
   was divided against itself, He immediately added, "He that is not with
   Me is against Me, and he that gathereth not with Me scattereth abroad,"
   [2479] that He might show that they did not belong to Him who by
   gathering "without" wished not to "gather" but "to scatter abroad." And
   afterwards He subjoined, "Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin
   and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy of the
   Spirit shall not be forgiven." [2480] What is this "wherefore?" Shall
   the blasphemy of the Spirit only not be forgiven, because "he who is
   not with Christ is against Him, and he who gathereth not with Him
   scattereth abroad?" Even so, doubtless. For he that gathereth not with
   Him, howsoever he may gather under His name, hath not the Holy Ghost.

   37. Thus then hath He altogether forced us to understand that the
   remission of no sin nor blasphemy can be effected anywhere else, save
   in the gathering together of Christ, which scattereth not abroad. For
   it is gathered together in the Holy Spirit, which is not as that
   unclean spirit, divided against Himself. And therefore all
   congregations, or dispersions rather, which call themselves Churches of
   Christ, and are divided against themselves and contrary one to the
   other, and hostile to the congregation of Unity, which is His True
   Church, do not therefore belong to His congregation, because they seem
   to have His Name. But they might belong to it, if the Holy Spirit in
   whom this congregation is joined together, were divided against
   Himself. But because this is not so ("for he that is not with Christ is
   against Him, and he that gathereth not with Him scattereth abroad");
   therefore all manner of sin and all blasphemy shall be forgiven unto
   men in this congregation, which Christ gathereth together in the Holy
   Spirit, who is not divided against Himself. But that blasphemy of the
   Spirit Himself, whereby in an impenitent heart resistance is made to
   this so great gift of God even to the end of this present life, shall
   not be forgiven. For though a man so oppose himself to the truth, as to
   resist God speaking, not in the Prophets, but in His Only Son (since
   for our sakes He was pleased that He should be the Son of Man, that He
   might speak to us in Him), yet shall he be forgiven when in repentance
   he shall have recourse to the goodness of God, who forasmuch as He
   "willeth not the death of the wicked, but rather that he should turn
   from his way and live," [2481] hath given the Holy Spirit to His
   Church, that whosoever forgiveth sins in the Spirit, they should be
   forgiven. But whoso stands out as an enemy to this gift, so as not in
   repentance to seek it, but by impenitence to gainsay it, his sin
   becomes unpardonable; not sin of any one specific kind, but the
   contempt, or even opposing of the remission of sins itself. And so a
   word is spoken against the Holy Spirit, when men never come from the
   dispersion to the congregation which has received the Holy Spirit for
   the remission of sins. Unto which congregation if any come without
   hypocrisy, though it be through the ministry of a wicked clergyman, a
   reprobate and a hypocrite, so he be a Catholic minister, he shall
   receive remission of sins in this Holy Spirit. For such is the working
   of this Spirit in the Holy Church, even in this present time, when the
   corn [2482] is as it were being threshed with the chaff, that he
   despises no man's sincere confession, and is deceived by no man's false
   pretences, and so flies from the reprobate, as yet by their ministry to
   gather together those that are approved. [2483] One refuge then there
   is against unpardonable blasphemy, that we take heed of an impenitent
   heart; and that it be not thought that repentance can avail ought,
   unless the Church be kept to, in which remission of sins is given, and
   the fellowship of the Spirit is preserved in the bond of peace.

   38. I have through the mercy and assistance of the Lord handled, as I
   best was able, this most difficult question, if indeed I have been able
   to do it in any measure. Nevertheless, whatever I have not been able to
   apprehend in the difficulties of it, let it not be imputed to the truth
   itself, which is a healthful exercise to the godly, even when it is
   hidden, but to my infirmity, who either could not see what others might
   have understood, or could not explain what I did understand. But for
   that which perhaps I have been able to discover by force of meditation,
   and to develop in words, to Him must the thanks be given, from whom I
   have sought, from whom I have asked, unto whom I have knocked, that I
   might have wherewithal to be nourished myself in meditation, and to
   minister to you in speaking.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2335] 2 Cor. iii. 5.

   [2336] Matt. xii. 22-26.

   [2337] Matt. xii. 27.

   [2338] Virtutis.

   [2339] Matt. xii. 28.

   [2340] Matt. xii. 29.

   [2341] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

   [2342] Eph. ii. 3.

   [2343] Matt. xii. 30.

   [2344] Voce.

   [2345] 2 Tim. ii. 19.

   [2346] Maximianus, Deacon of the Church of Carthage, of the faction of
   Donatus, took offence at Primianus Bishop of Carthage, who had
   excommunicated him, and induced certain of the Donatist bishops to call
   Primianus to account; and when he would not acknowledge their
   authority, he was, as Cæcilianus had been, condemned in his absence.
   Primianus was restored by others of the Donatist bishops to communion,
   and Maximianus, together with twelve bishops who had assisted at his
   ordination as bishop, was condemned (Augustin, De Gest. Emerit. Donat.
   9, etc., Lib. ad. Bonif.; Ep. 185 (al. 56) 17). The rest were restored
   to communion on their submission. The Maximianists were afterwards
   condemned by a Council of three hundred and ten bishops at the Council
   of Vagaia, A.D. 394 (Ep. 108 (255) 6, and 141 (al. 152) 6). St.
   Augustin frequently urges the separation of the Maximianists from the
   Donatists as condemnatory on their own principles of their own schism
   against the Catholic Church.

   [2347] Matt. xii. 31, 32.

   [2348] Acts xxiii. 8.

   [2349] Ipsa discessio.

   [2350] 2 Tim. ii. 25, 26.

   [2351] Fidelis.

   [2352] Sufficere.

   [2353] This word must be supplied from the former clause in the verse,
   "Whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of Man" (Matt. xii. 32). It
   does not occur in the second clause of the verse in any of the
   versions.

   [2354] Imperitorum.

   [2355] Mereatur.

   [2356] he tou Pneumatos blasphemia.

   [2357] John xv. 22.

   [2358] Matt. xi. 28.

   [2359] Rom. v. 20.

   [2360] Matt. ix. 13.

   [2361] Studium.

   [2362] Fastidium.

   [2363] John iii. 5.

   [2364] Mark iii. 28, 29. Reus æterni peccati, hamartematos (for
   kriseos). So also Cyprian, Ep. xvi.

   [2365] Luke xii. 10.

   [2366] Clause dictum.

   [2367] 1 Cor. xiv. 15.

   [2368] Contradictioni.

   [2369] Jas. i. 13.

   [2370] Deut. xiii. 3.

   [2371] John vi. 5, 6.

   [2372] Mark xvi. 16.

   [2373] Jas. ii. 19.

   [2374] Acts viii. 13.

   [2375] Gal. v. 6.

   [2376] John vi. 56.

   [2377] 1 Cor. xi. 29.

   [2378] Luke xxii. 21.

   [2379] Confectum.

   [2380] Blasphemandi modus, vel potius immoderatio.

   [2381] Proprietate.

   [2382] Substantia.

   [2383] See note on the word Hypostasis in the Nicene Anathema, St. Ath.
   Treatises against Arianism, part 1, p. 66, Oxford translation.

   [2384] Conf. lib. vii. x. (16).

   [2385] Insinuatur.

   [2386] Auctoritas; St. Augustin, C. Maxim. iii. 14, guards the word
   against any idea of inequality; see Pet. De Trin. v. and 5. 11-13, who
   observes that the Greeks have no word exactly corresponding, although
   arche, aition, are equivalent.

   [2387] Commune.

   [2388] Rom. v. 5.

   [2389] 1 Pet. iv. 8.

   [2390] Origo.

   [2391] Orta.

   [2392] Effusa.

   [2393] Isa. lix. 2.

   [2394] John xx. 22, 23.

   [2395] John iii. 5.

   [2396] Matt. iii. 1, 2.

   [2397] Matt. iv. 17.

   [2398] Matt. iii. 11.

   [2399] Acts i. 5.

   [2400] See note g on Tert. De Bapt. c. 10, p. 268, Oxford translation.

   [2401] Acts ii. 3.

   [2402] Luke xii. 49.

   [2403] Rom. xii. 11.

   [2404] Rom. v. 5.

   [2405] Matt. xxiv. 12.

   [2406] Col. i. 13.

   [2407] John xii. 31.

   [2408] Eph. ii. 2.

   [2409] Rom. ii. 4-6.

   [2410] Matt. iii. 2 and iv. 17.

   [2411] Luke xxiv. 46, 47.

   [2412] Judicari.

   [2413] Ezek. xviii. 23.

   [2414] 1 Cor. iv. 5.

   [2415] 1 Tim. v. 17.

   [2416] Jas. i. 22.

   [2417] John iii. 5.

   [2418] John xx. 22, 23.

   [2419] Matt. xii. 31

   [2420] Mark iii. 28.

   [2421] John xv. 22.

   [2422] John xvi. 8, 9.

   [2423] Matt. vi. 14.

   [2424] Matt. vi. 9.

   [2425] Matt. vi. 12.

   [2426] Matt. ix. 6.

   [2427] John xiv. 10.

   [2428] John v. 17.

   [2429] John v. 19.

   [2430] John xv. 24.

   [2431] Matt. xii. 28.

   [2432] Ps. lxxiii. 7, Sept. (lxxiv. 7, English version).

   [2433] Josh. v. 3.

   [2434] John iii. 8.

   [2435] 1 Cor. xii. 11.

   [2436] John xiv. 10.

   [2437] Origo.

   [2438] John xv. 24.

   [2439] Serm. ii. (lii. Bened.) 8-13 (iv.).

   [2440] Matt. xvii. 5; Luke iii. 22.

   [2441] Spiritualiter.

   [2442] Matt. xiv. 25.

   [2443] Matt. iii. 16.

   [2444] Acts ii. 3.

   [2445] Rom. viii. 15.

   [2446] Matt. vi. 12.

   [2447] 1 John iii. 24.

   [2448] Rom. viii. 16.

   [2449] Phil. ii. 1.

   [2450] Eph. iv. 3.

   [2451] John xv. 26.

   [2452] Matt. x. 20.

   [2453] Gal. iv. 6.

   [2454] Rom. viii. 9.

   [2455] Jude 19.

   [2456] 1 Cor. ii. 14.

   [2457] 1 Cor. iii. 1, 2, 3, Vulgate.

   [2458] 1 Cor. iii. 4, 5.

   [2459] Matt. xvi. 23.

   [2460] 1 Cor. iii. 16.

   [2461] Wisd. i. 5.

   [2462] Congregationibus vel potius segregationibus.

   [2463] Gal. iv. 29.

   [2464] 2 Tim. iii. 5.

   [2465] Acts ii. 37, 38.

   [2466] John xiv. 26.

   [2467] Significationes.

   [2468] Habetur.

   [2469] Luke xii. 8, 9.

   [2470] Luke xii. 10.

   [2471] Matt. xxvi. 75.

   [2472] Luke xxii. 31.

   [2473] Mark iii. 28, 29.

   [2474] Mark iii. 30.

   [2475] Acts iv. 32.

   [2476] John vii. 20 and viii. 48.

   [2477] Portantes et tractantes.

   [2478] Conventicula.

   [2479] Matt. xii. 30.

   [2480] Matt. xii. 31.

   [2481] Ezek. xxxiii. 11.

   [2482] Area.

   [2483] Probos.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXII.

   [LXXII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xii. 33, "Either make the tree good,
   and its fruit good," etc.

   1. The Lord Jesus hath admonished us, that we be good trees, and that
   so we may be able to bear good fruits. For He saith, "Either make the
   tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt, and his
   fruit corrupt, for the tree is known by his fruit." [2484] When He
   says, "Make the tree good, and his fruit good;" this of course is not
   an admonition, but a wholesome precept, to which obedience is
   necessary. But when He saith, "Make the tree corrupt, and his fruit
   corrupt;" this is not a precept that thou shouldest do it; but an
   admonition, that thou shouldest beware of it. For He spoke against
   those, who thought that although they were evil, they could speak good
   things or have good works. This the Lord Jesus saith is impossible. For
   the man himself must first be changed, in order that his works may be
   changed. For if a man abide in his evil state, he cannot have good
   works; if he abide in his good state, he cannot have evil works.

   2. But who was found good by the Lord, since "Christ died for the
   ungodly"? [2485] He found them all corrupt trees, but to those who
   "believed in His Name, He gave power to become the sons of God." [2486]
   Whosoever then now is a good man, that is, a good tree, was found
   corrupt, and made good. And if when He came He had chosen to root up
   the corrupt trees, what tree would have remained which did not deserve
   to be rooted up? But He came first to impart [2487] mercy, that He
   might afterwards exercise judgment, to whom it is said, "I will sing
   unto Thee O Lord, of mercy and judgment." [2488] He gave then remission
   of sins to those who believed in Him, He would not even take account
   with them of past reckonings. [2489] He gave remission of sins, He made
   them good trees. He delayed the ax, He gave [2490] security.

   3. Of this ax does John speak, saying, "Now is the ax laid unto the
   root of the trees; every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit shall
   be hewn down, and cast into the fire." [2491] With this ax does the
   Householder in the Gospel threaten, saying, "Behold these three years I
   come to this tree, and find no fruit on it." Now I must clear [2492]
   the ground; wherefore let it be cut down. And the husbandman
   intercedes, saying, "Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall
   dig about it and dung it; and if it bear fruit, well; and if not, then
   Thou shalt come and cut it down." [2493] So the Lord hath visited
   mankind as it were three years, that is, at three several times. The
   first time was before the Law; the second under the Law; the third is
   now, which is the time of grace. For if He did not visit mankind before
   the Law, whence was Abel, and Enoch, and Noe, and Abraham, and Isaac,
   and Jacob, whose Lord He was pleased to be called? And He to whom all
   nations belonged, as though He were the God of three men only, said, "I
   am the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob." [2494] But if He did not
   visit under the Law, He would not have given the Law itself. After the
   Law, came the very Master of the house in person; He suffered, and
   died, and rose again; He gave the Holy Spirit, He made the Gospel to be
   preached throughout all the world, and yet a certain tree remained
   unfruitful. Still is there a certain portion of mankind, which doth not
   yet amend itself. The husbandman intercedes; the Apostle prays for the
   people; "I bow my knees," he saith, "unto the Father for you, that
   being rooted and grounded in love, ye may be able to comprehend with
   all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and
   to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye might be
   filled with all the fulness of God." [2495] By bowing the knees, he
   intercedes with the Master of the house for us, that we be not rooted
   up. Therefore since He must necessarily come, let us take care that He
   find us fruitful. The digging about the tree is the lowliness of the
   penitent. For every ditch is low. The dunging it, is the filthy [2496]
   robe [2497] of repentance. For what is more filthy than dung; yet if
   well used, what more profitable?

   4. Let each one then be a good tree; let him not suppose that he can
   bear good fruit, if he remain a corrupt tree. There will be no good
   fruit, but from the good tree. Change the heart, and the work will be
   changed. Root out desire, plant in charity. "For as desire is the root
   of all evil," [2498] so is charity the root of all good. Why then do
   men fret and contend one with another, saying, "What is good?" O that
   thou knewest what good is! What thou dost wish to have is not very
   good; this is good which thou dost not wish to be. For thou dost wish
   to have health of body; it is good indeed; yet thou canst not think
   that to be any great good, which the wicked have as well. Thou dost
   wish to have gold and silver; I grant that these also are good things,
   but then only if thou make a good use of them; and a good use of them
   thou wilt not make, if thou art evil thyself. And hence gold and silver
   are to the evil evil; to the good are good, not because gold and silver
   make them good; but because they find them good, they are turned to a
   good use. Again, thou dost wish to have honour, it is good; but this
   too only if thou make a good use of it. To how many has honour been the
   occasion of destruction! And again, to how many has honour been the
   instrument [2499] of good works!

   5. Let us then, if we can, make a distinction as to these goods; for it
   is of good trees that we are speaking. And here there is nothing, which
   every one ought so much to think of, as to turn his eyes upon himself,
   to learn in himself, examine himself, inspect himself, search into
   himself, and find out himself; and kill what is displeasing; and long
   for and plant in that which is well-pleasing (to God). For when a man
   finds himself so empty of better goods, why is he greedy of external
   goods? And what profit is there in a coffer full of goods, with an
   empty conscience? Thou wishest to have good things, and dost thou not
   then wish to be good thyself? Seest thou not that thou oughtest rather
   to blush for thy good things, if thy house is full of good things, and
   thou its owner art evil? For what is there, tell me, thou wouldest wish
   to have that is bad. Not any one thing I am sure; neither wife; nor
   son; nor daughter; nor manservant; nor maidservant; nor country seat;
   nor a coat; nay nor a shoe; [2500] and yet thou art willing to have a
   bad life. I pray thee prefer thy way of life to thy shoes. All things
   which encompass thy sight, as being of elegance and beauty, are highly
   prized by thee; and art thou so lightly esteemed by thyself, and so
   devoid of beauty? If the good things of which thine house is full,
   which thou hast longed to possess, and feared to lose, could make
   answer to thee, would they not cry out to thee, As thou wishest to have
   us good, so do we also wish to have a good owner? And now in speechless
   accents do they address thy Lord against thee: "Lo! thou hast given him
   so many good things, and he himself is evil. What profit is there to
   him in that he hath, when he hath not Him who hath given him all!"

   6. One then who has been admonished, and it may be moved to compunction
   by these words, may ask what is good? what is the nature of good? and
   whence it comes? Well is it that thou hast understood that it is thy
   duty to ask this. I will answer thy enquiries, and will say, "That is
   good which thou canst not lose against thy will." For gold thou mayest
   lose even against thy will; and so thou canst a house; and honours, and
   even the health of the body; but the good whereby thou art truly good,
   thou dost neither receive against thy will, nor against thy will dost
   lose it. I enquire then, "What is the nature of this good?" One of the
   Psalms teaches us an important matter, perchance it is even this that
   we are seeking for. For it says, "O ye sons of men, how long will ye be
   heavy in heart?" [2501] How long will that tree be in its three [2502]
   years fruitlessness? "O ye sons of men, how long will ye be heavy in
   heart?" What is "heavy in heart"? "Why do ye love vanity, and seek
   after leasing?" And then it goes on to say what we must really seek
   after; "Know ye that the Lord hath magnified His Holy One?" [2503] Now
   Christ hath come, now hath He been magnified, now hath He risen again,
   and ascended into heaven, now is His Name preached through the world:
   "How long will ye be heavy in heart?" Let the times past suffice; now
   that that Holy One hath been magnified, "How long will ye be heavy in
   heart?" After the three years, what remains but the ax? "How long will
   ye be heavy in heart? Why do ye love vanity, and seek after leasing?"
   Vain, useless, frivolous, [2504] fleeting things are these still sought
   after, now that Christ the Holy One hath been so magnified? Truth now
   is crying aloud, and is vanity still sought after? "How long will ye be
   heavy in heart?"

   7. With good reason is this world severely scourged; for the world hath
   known now its Master's words. "And the servant," He saith, "that knew
   not his Master's will, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall
   be beaten with few stripes." [2505] Why? That he may seek after his
   Master's will. The servant then who knew not His will, this was the
   world, before "He magnified His Holy One;" it was "the servant who knew
   not his Master's will," and therefore "shall be beaten with few
   stripes." But the servant who now knoweth his Master's will, that is
   now, since the Godhead "sanctified His Holy One," and "doeth not His
   will, shall be beaten with many stripes." What marvel then, if the
   world be now much beaten? "It is the servant which knew his Master's
   will, and did commit things worthy of stripes." Let him then not refuse
   to be beaten with many stripes; since if in unrighteousness he will not
   hear his teacher, in righteousness must he feel his avenger. At least,
   let him not murmur against Him that chasteneth him, when he sees that
   he is worthy of stripes, that so he may attain [2506] mercy; through
   Christ our Lord, who liveth and reigneth, with God the Father and the
   Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2484] Matt. xii. 33.

   [2485] Rom. v. 6.

   [2486] John i. 12.

   [2487] Prærogare.

   [2488] Ps. ci. 1.

   [2489] Chartis.

   [2490] Distulit securim, dedit securitatem.

   [2491] Matt. iii. 10.

   [2492] Evacuare.

   [2493] Luke xiii. 7, etc.

   [2494] Exod. iii. 15.

   [2495] Eph. iii. 14, 17-19.

   [2496] Sordes poenitentiæ.

   [2497] Bingh, Antiq. xviii. c. 2, § 2.

   [2498] 1 Tim. vi. 10. Cupiditas, Vulgate.

   [2499] Ministerium.

   [2500] Vide Serm. ccxxxii. (vii.) 8.

   [2501] Ps. iv. 3, Sept. (iv. 2, English version).

   [2502] Triennio.

   [2503] Ps. iv. 4.

   [2504] Pompatica.

   [2505] Luke xii. 48.

   [2506] Mereatur.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXIII.

   [LXXIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xiii. 19, etc., where the Lord Jesus
   explaineth the parables of the sower.

   1. Both yesterday and to-day ye have heard the parables of the sower,
   in the words of our Lord Jesus Christ. Do ye who were present
   yesterday, recollect to-day. Yesterday we read of that sower, who when
   he scattered seed, "some fell by the way side," [2507] which the birds
   picked up; "some in stony places," which dried up from the heat; "some
   among thorns, which were choked," and could not bring forth fruit; and
   "other some into good ground, and it brought forth fruit, a hundred,
   sixty, thirty fold." But to-day the Lord hath again spoken another
   parable of the sower, "who sowed good seed in his field. While men
   slept the enemy came, and sowed tares upon it." [2508] As long as it
   was only in the blade, it did not appear; but when the fruit of the
   good seed began to appear, "then appeared the tares also." The servants
   of the householder were offended, when they saw a quantity of tares
   among the good wheat, and wished to root them out, but they were not
   suffered to do so; but it was said to them, "Let both grow together
   until the harvest." [2509] Now the Lord Jesus Christ explained this
   parable also; and said that He was the sower of the good seed, and He
   showed how that the enemy who sowed the tares was the devil; the time
   of harvest, the end of the world; His field the whole world. And what
   saith He? "In the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye
   together first the tares, to burn them, but gather the wheat into My
   barn." Why are ye so hasty, He says, ye servants full of zeal? Ye see
   tares among the wheat, ye see evil Christians among the good; and ye
   wish to root up the evil ones; be quiet, it is not the time of harvest.
   That time will come, may it only find you wheat! Why do ye vex
   yourselves? Why bear impatiently the mixture of the evil with the good?
   In the field they may be with you, but they will not be so in the barn.

   2. Now ye know that those three places mentioned yesterday where the
   seed did not grow, "the way side," "the stony ground," and "the thorny
   places," are the same as these "tares." They received only a different
   name under a different similitude. For when similitudes are used, or
   the literal meaning of a term is not expressed, not the truth but a
   similitude of the truth is conveyed by them. I see that but few have
   understood my meaning; yet it is for the benefit of all that I speak.
   In things visible, a way side is a way side, stony ground is stony
   ground, thorny places are thorny places; they are simply what they are,
   because the names are used in their literal sense. But in parables and
   similitudes one thing may be called by many names; therefore there is
   nothing inconsistent in my telling you that that "way side," that
   "stony ground," those "thorny places," are bad Christians, and that
   they too are the "tares." Is not Christ called "the Lamb"? Is not
   Christ "the Lion" too? Among wild beasts, and cattle, a lamb is simply
   a lamb, and a lion, a lion: but Christ is both. The first are
   respectively what they are in propriety of expression; the Latter both
   together in a figurative sense. [2510] Nay much more; besides this it
   may happen that under a figure, things very different from one another
   may be called by one and the same name. For what is so different as
   Christ and the devil? yet both Christ and the devil are called "a
   lion." Christ is called "a lion:" "The Lion hath prevailed of the tribe
   of Judah;" [2511] and the devil is called a lion: "Know ye not that
   your adversary the Devil walketh about as a roaring lion, seeking whom
   he may devour?" [2512] Both the one and the other then is a lion; the
   one a lion by reason of His strength; the other for his savageness; the
   one a lion for His "prevailing;" the other for his injuring. The devil
   again is a serpent, "that old serpent;" [2513] are we commanded then to
   imitate the devil, when our Shepherd told us, "Be ye wise as serpents,
   and simple as doves"? [2514]

   3. Accordingly I yesterday addressed "the way side," I addressed the
   "stony ground," I addressed the "thorny places;" and I said, Be ye
   changed whilst ye may: turn up with the plough the hard ground, cast
   the stones out of the field, pluck up the thorns out of it. Be loth to
   retain that hard heart, from which the word of God may quickly pass
   away and be lost. Be loth to have that lightness of soil, where the
   root of charity can take no deep hold. Be loth to choke the good seed
   which is sown in you by my labours, with the lusts and the cares of
   this world. For it is the Lord who sows; and we are only His labourers.
   But be ye the "good ground." I said yesterday, and I say again today to
   all, Let one bring forth "a hundred, another sixty, another thirty
   fold." In one the fruit is more, in another less; but all will have a
   place in the barn. Yesterday I said all this, to-day I am addressing
   the tares; but the sheep themselves are the tares. O evil Christians, O
   ye, who in filling only press the Church by your evil lives; amend
   yourselves before the harvest come. "Say not, I have sinned, and what
   hath befallen me?" [2515] God hath not lost His power; but He is
   requiring repentance from thee. I say this to the evil, who yet are
   Christians; I say this to the tares. For they are in the field; and it
   may so be, that they who to-day are tares, may to-morrow be wheat. And
   so I will address the wheat also.

   4. O ye Christians, whose lives are good, ye sigh and groan as being
   few among many, few among very many. The winter will pass away, the
   summer will come; lo! the harvest will soon be here. The angels will
   come who can make the separation, and who cannot make mistakes. We in
   this time present are like those servants of whom it was said, "Wilt
   Thou that we go and gather them up?" [2516] for we were wishing, if it
   might be so, that no evil ones should remain among the good. But it has
   been told us, "Let both grow together until the harvest." [2517] Why?
   For ye are such as may be deceived. Hear finally; "Lest while ye gather
   up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them." [2518] What good
   are ye doing? Will ye by your eagerness make a waste of My harvest? The
   reapers will come, and who the reapers are He hath explained, "And the
   reapers are the angels." [2519] We are but men, the reapers are the
   angels. We too indeed, if we finish our course, shall be equal to the
   angels of God; but now when we chafe against the wicked, we are as yet
   but men. And we ought now to give ear to the words, "Wherefore let him
   that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall." [2520] For do ye
   think, my Brethren, that these tares we read of do not get up into this
   [2521] seat? [2522] Think ye that they are all below, and none above up
   here? God grant we may not be so. "But with me it is a very small thing
   that I should be judged of you." [2523] I tell you of a truth, my
   Beloved, even in these high seats there is both wheat, and tares, and
   among the laity there is wheat, and tares. Let the good tolerate the
   bad; let the bad change themselves, and imitate the good. Let us all,
   if it may be so, attain to God; let us all through His mercy escape the
   evil of this world. Let us seek after good days, for we are now in evil
   days; but in the evil days let us not blaspheme, that so we may be able
   to arrive at the good days.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2507] Matt. xiii. 3-8.

   [2508] Matt. xiii. 24, 25.

   [2509] Matt. xiii. 30.

   [2510] Per similitudinem.

   [2511] Rev. v. 5.

   [2512] 1 Pet. v. 8.

   [2513] Rev. xii. 9.

   [2514] Matt. x. 16.

   [2515] Ecclus. v. 4.

   [2516] Matt. xiii. 28.

   [2517] Matt. xiii. 30.

   [2518] Matt. xiii. 29.

   [2519] Matt. xiii. 39.

   [2520] 1 Cor. x. 12.

   [2521] Apsidas.

   [2522] Apsis the higher semicircular or arched part of the chancel,
   where the bishop had his throne with the presbyters. See Bing. Antiq.
   B. viii. c. vi. §§ 9, 10.

   [2523] 1 Cor. iv. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXIV.

   [LXXIV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xiii. 52, "Therefore every scribe who
   hath been made a disciple to the kingdom of Heaven," etc.

   1. The lesson of the Gospel reminds me to seek out, and to explain to
   you, Beloved, as the Lord shall give me power, who is "that Scribe
   instructed in the kingdom of God, who is "like unto an householder
   bringing out of his treasure things new and old." [2524] For here the
   lesson ended. "What are the new and old things of an instructed
   Scribe?" Now it is well known who they were, whom the ancients, after
   the custom of our Scriptures, called Scribes, those, namely, who
   professed the knowledge of the Law. For such were called Scribes among
   the Jewish people, not such as are so called now in the service [2525]
   of judges, or the custom of states. For we must not enter school to no
   purpose, but we must know in what signification to take the words of
   Scripture; lest when anything is mentioned out of it, which is usually
   understood in another secular use of the term, the hearer mistake it,
   and by thinking of its customary meaning, understand not what he has
   heard. The Scribes then were they who professed the knowledge of the
   Law, and to them belonged both the keeping and the studying, as well as
   also the transcribing and the expounding, of the books of the Law.

   2. Such were they whom our Lord Jesus Christ rebukes, because they have
   the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and "would neither enter in
   themselves, nor suffer others to enter in;" [2526] in these words
   finding fault with the Pharisees and Scribes, the teachers of the law
   of the Jews. Of whom in another place He says, "Whatsoever they say,
   do, but do not ye after their works, for they say and do not." [2527]
   Why is it said to you, "For they say and do not?" but that there are
   some of whom what the Apostle says, is clearly exemplified, "Thou that
   preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal? Thou that sayest a
   man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? Thou that
   abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege? Thou that makest thy boast
   of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? For the
   name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you." [2528] It is
   surely plain that the Lord speaks of these, "For they say and do not."
   They then are Scribes, but not "instructed in the kingdom of God."

   3. Peradventure some of you may say, "And how can a bad man speak what
   is good, when it is written, in the words of the Lord Himself, A good
   man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good things,
   and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth
   evil things. Ye hypocrites, how can ye being evil speak good things?'"
   [2529] In the one place He says, "How can ye being evil speak good
   things?" in the other He says, "What they say, do, but do ye not after
   their works. For they say, and do not." If "they say and do not," they
   are evil; if they are evil, they cannot "speak good things;" how then
   are we to do what we hear from them, when we cannot hear from them what
   is good? Now take heed, Holy and Beloved, [2530] how this question may
   be solved. Whatever an evil man brings forth from himself, is evil;
   whatever an evil man brings forth out of his own heart, is evil; for
   there is the evil treasure. But whatever a good man brings forth out of
   his heart, is good; for there is the good treasure. Whence then did
   those evil men bring forth good things? "Because they sat in Moses'
   seat." [2531] Had He not first said, "They sit in Moses' seat;" He
   would never have enjoined that evil men should be heard. For what they
   brought forth out of the evil treasure of their own heart, was one
   thing; another what they gave utterance to out of the seat of Moses,
   the criers so to say of the judge. What the crier says, will never be
   attributed to him if he speak in the presence of the judge. What the
   crier says in his own house is one thing, what the crier says as
   hearing it from the judge is another. For whether he will or no, the
   crier must proclaim the sentence [2532] of punishment even of his own
   friend. And so whether he will or no, must he proclaim the sentence of
   the acquittal even of his own enemy. Suppose him to speak from his
   heart; he acquits his friend, and punishes his enemy. Suppose him to
   speak from the judge's chair; he punishes his friend, and acquits his
   enemy. So with the Scribes; suppose them to speak out of their own
   heart; thou wilt hear, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall
   die." [2533] Suppose them to speak from Moses' seat; thou wilt hear,
   "Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shall not
   steal, Thou shall not bear false witness. Honour thy father and mother;
   thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself." [2534] Do then this which
   the official seat [2535] proclaims by the mouth of the Scribes; not
   that which their heart utters. For so embracing both judgments of the
   Lord, thou wilt not be obedient in the one, and guilty of disobedience
   in the other; but wilt understand that both agree together, and wilt
   regard both that as true, "that a good man out of the good treasure of
   his heart bringeth forth good things, and an evil man out of the evil
   treasure bringeth forth evil things;" and that other also, that those
   Scribes did not speak good things out of the evil treasure of their
   heart, but that they were able to speak good things out of the treasure
   of Moses' seat.

   4. So then those words of the Lord will not disturb you, when He says,
   "Every tree is known by his own fruit. Do men gather grapes of thorns,
   and figs of thistles?" [2536] The Scribes and Pharisees of the Jews
   therefore were thorns and thistles, and notwithstanding, "what they say
   do, but do ye not after their works." So then the grape is gathered
   from thorns, and the fig from thistles, as He has given thee to
   understand according to the method I have just laid down. For so
   sometimes in the vineyard's thorny hedge, the vines get entangled, and
   clusters of grapes hang from the brambles. Thou hadst no sooner heard
   the name of thorns, than thou wert on the point of disregarding the
   grape. But seek for the root of the thorns, and thou wilt see where to
   find it. Follow too the root of the hanging cluster, and thou wilt see
   where to find it. So understand that the one refers to the Pharisee's
   heart, the other to Moses' seat.

   5. But why were they such as they were? "Because," says St. Paul, "the
   vail is upon their heart. And they do not see that the old things are
   passed away, and all things are become new." [2537] Hence it is that
   they were such, and all others who even now are like them. Why are they
   old things? Because they have been a long while published. Why new?
   Because they relate to the kingdom of God. How the vail then is taken
   away, the Apostle himself tells us. "But when thou shalt turn to the
   Lord, the vail shall be taken away." [2538] So then the Jew who does
   not turn to the Lord, does not carry on his mind's eye to the end. Just
   as at that time the children of Israel in this figure did not carry on
   the gaze of their eyes "to the end," [2539] that is, to the face of
   Moses. For the shining face of Moses contained a figure of the truth;
   the vail was interposed because the children of Israel could not yet
   behold the glory of his countenance. "Which figure is done away."
   [2540] For so said the Apostle; "which is done away." Why done away?
   Because when the emperor comes, the images of him are taken away. The
   image is looked upon, when the emperor is not present; but where he is,
   whose image it is, there the image is removed. There were then images
   borne before Him, before that our Emperor the Lord Jesus Christ came.
   When the images were taken away, the glory of the Emperor's presence is
   seen. Therefore, "When any one turneth to the Lord, the vail is taken
   away." For the voice of Moses sounded through the vail, but the face of
   Moses was not seen. And so now the voice of Christ sounds to the Jews
   by the voice of the old Scriptures: they hear their voice, but they see
   not the face of Him that speaketh. Would they then that the vail should
   be taken away? "Let them turn to the Lord." For then the old things are
   not taken away, but laid up in a treasury, that the Scribe may
   henceforth be "instructed in the kingdom of God, bringing forth out of
   his treasure" not "new things" only, nor "old things" only. For if he
   bring forth "new things" only or "old things" only; he is not "a scribe
   instructed in the kingdom of God, bringing forth out of his treasure
   things new and old." If he say and do them not; he brings forth from
   the official seat, not from the treasure of his heart. And (we speak
   the truth, Holy Brethren) what things are brought out of the old, are
   illustrated by the new. Therefore do "we turn to the Lord, that the
   vail may be taken away."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2524] Matt. xiii. 52.

   [2525] Officiis.

   [2526] Luke xi. 52.

   [2527] Matt. xxiii. 3.

   [2528] Rom. ii. 21, etc.

   [2529] Matt. xii. 35, 34.

   [2530] Sanctitas Vestra.

   [2531] Matt. xxiii. 2.

   [2532] Vocem.

   [2533] Isa. xxii. 13.

   [2534] Exod. xx. 12, etc.

   [2535] Cathedra.

   [2536] Luke vi. 44; Matt. vii. 16.

   [2537] 2 Cor. iii. 15, v. 17.

   [2538] 2 Cor. iii. 16.

   [2539] 2 Cor. iii. 13. eis to telos.

   [2540] tou katargoumenou. Quod evacuatur.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXV.

   [LXXV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xiv. 24, "But the boat was now in the
   midst of the sea, distressed by the waves."

   1. The lesson of the Gospel which we have just heard is a lesson of
   humility to us all, that we may see and know where we are, and whither
   we must tend and hasten. For that ship which carries the disciples,
   which was tossed in the waves by a contrary wind, is not without its
   meaning. Nor without a meaning [2541] did the Lord after He had left
   the multitudes, go up into a mountain to pray alone; and then coming to
   His disciples found them in danger, walking on the sea, and getting up
   into the ship strengthened them, and appeased the waves. But what
   marvel if He can appease all things who created all? Nevertheless after
   He was come up into the ship, they who were being borne in her, came
   saying, "Of a truth Thou art the Son of God." [2542] But before this
   plain discovery of Himself [2543] they were troubled, saying, "It is a
   phantom." [2544] But He coming up into the ship took away the
   fluctuation of mind from their hearts, when they were now more
   endangered in their souls by doubting, than before in their bodies by
   the waves.

   2. Yet in all this that the Lord did, He instructs us as to the nature
   of our life here. In this world there is not a man who is not a
   stranger; though all do not desire to return to their own country. Now
   by this very journey we are exposed to waves and tempests; but we must
   needs be at least in the ship. For if there be perils in the ship,
   without the ship there is certain destruction. For whatever strength of
   arm he may have who swims in the open sea, yet in time he is carried
   away and sunk, mastered by the greatness of its waves. Need then there
   is that we be in the ship, that is, that we be carried in the wood,
   that we may be able to cross this sea. Now this Wood in which our
   weakness is carried is the Cross of the Lord, by which we are signed,
   and delivered from the dangerous tempests [2545] of this world. We are
   exposed to the violence of the waves; but He who helpeth us is God.

   3. For in that when the Lord had left the multitudes, "He went up alone
   into a mountain to pray;" [2546] that mountain signifies the height of
   heaven. For having left the multitudes, the Lord after His Resurrection
   ascended Alone into heaven, and "there," as the Apostle says, "He
   maketh intercession for us." [2547] There is some meaning then in His
   "leaving the multitudes, and going up into a mountain to pray Alone."
   For He Alone is as yet the First-begotten from the dead, after the
   resurrection of His Body, unto the right hand of the Father, the High
   Priest and Advocate of our prayers. The Head of the Church is above,
   that the rest of the members may follow at the end. If then "He maketh
   intercession for us," above the height of all creatures, as it were on
   the mountain top, "He prayeth Alone."

   4. Meanwhile the ship which carries the disciples, that is, the Church,
   is tossed and shaken by the tempests of temptation; and the contrary
   wind, that is, the devil her adversary, rests not, and strives to
   hinder her from arriving at rest. But greater is "He who maketh
   intercession for us." For in this our tossing to and fro in which we
   toil, He giveth us confidence in coming to us, and strengthening us;
   only let us not in our trouble throw ourselves out of the ship, and
   cast ourselves into the sea. For though the ship be in trouble, still
   it is the ship. She alone carrieth the disciples, and receiveth Christ.
   There is danger, it is true, in the sea; but without her there is
   instant perishing. Keep thyself therefore in the ship, and pray to God.
   For when all counsels fail, when even the rudder is unserviceable, and
   the very spreading of the sails is rather dangerous than useful, when
   all human help and strength is gone, there remains only for the sailors
   the earnest cry of entreaty, and pouring out of prayer to God. He then
   who grants to sailors to reach the haven, shall He so forsake His own
   Church, as not to bring it on to rest?

   5. Yet, Brethren, this exceeding trouble is not in this ship, save only
   in the absence of the Lord. What! can he who is in the Church, have his
   Lord absent from him? When has he his Lord absent from him? When he is
   overcome by any lust. For as we find it said in a certain place in a
   figure, [2548] "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath: neither give
   place to the devil:" [2549] and this is understood not of this visible
   sun which holds as it were the zenith of glory among the rest of the
   visible creation, and which can be seen equally by us and by the
   beasts; but of that Light which none but the pure hearts of the
   faithful see; as it is written, "That was the true Light, which
   lighteneth every man that cometh into the world." [2550] For this light
   of the visible sun "lighteneth" even the minutest and smallest animals.
   Righteousness then and wisdom is that true light, which the mind ceases
   to see, when it is overcome by the disordering of anger as by a cloud;
   and then, as it were, the sun goes down upon a man's wrath. So also in
   this ship, when Christ is absent, every one is shaken by his own
   storms, and iniquities, and evil desires. For, for example, the law
   tells thee, "Thou shall not bear false witness." If thou observe the
   truth of witness, thou hast light in the soul; but if overcome by the
   desire of filthy lucre, thou hast determined in thy mind to speak false
   witness, thou wilt at once begin through Christ's absence to be
   troubled by the tempest, thou wilt be tossed to and fro by the waves of
   thy covetousness, thou wilt be endangered by the violent storm of thy
   lusts, and as it were through Christ's absence be well nigh sunk.

   6. What cause of fear is there, lest the ship be diverted from her
   course, and take a backward direction; which happens when, abandoning
   the hope of heavenly rewards, desire turneth the helm, and a man is
   turned to those things which are seen and pass away! For whosoever is
   disturbed by the temptations of lusts, and nevertheless still looks
   into those things which are within, is not so utterly in a desperate
   state, if he beg pardon for his faults, and exert himself to overcome
   and surmount the fury of the raging sea. But he who is so turned aside
   from what he was, as to say in his heart, "God does not see me; for He
   does not think of me, nor care whether I sin;" he hath turned the helm,
   borne away by the storm, and driven back to the point he came from. For
   there are many thoughts in the hearts of men; and when Christ is
   absent, the ship is tossed by the waves of this world, and by tempests
   manifold.

   7. Now the fourth watch of the night, is the end of the night; for each
   watch consists of three hours. It signifies then, that now in the end
   of the world the Lord is come to help, and is seen to walk upon the
   waters. For though this ship be tossed about by the storms of
   temptations, yet she sees her Glorified God walking above all the
   swellings of the sea; that is, above all the principalities of this
   world. For before it was said by an expression suited to the time of
   His Passion, [2551] when according to the flesh He showed forth an
   example of humility, that the waves of the sea vainly raged [2552]
   against Him, to which He yielded voluntarily for our sakes, that that
   prophecy, "I am come into the depths of the sea, and the floods
   overflow Me," [2553] might be fulfilled. For He did not repel the false
   witnesses, nor the savage shout of those that said, "Let Him be
   crucified." He did not by His power repress the savage hearts and words
   of those furious men, but in patience endured them all. They did unto
   Him whatsoever they listed; because He "became obedient to death, even
   the death of the Cross." [2554] But after that He was risen from the
   dead, that He might pray alone for His disciples placed in the Church
   as in a ship, and borne on in the faith of His Cross, as in wood, and
   in peril through this world's temptations as through the waves of the
   sea; His Name began to be honoured even in this world in which He was
   despised, accused, and slain; that He who in the dispensation of His
   suffering in the flesh, "had come into the depths of the sea, and the
   floods had overwhelmed Him," might now through the glory of His Name
   tread upon the necks of the proud as on the foaming waters. Just as we
   now see the Lord walking as it were upon the sea, under whose feet we
   behold the whole madness of this world subjected.

   8. But to the perils of tempests are added also the errors of heretics;
   and there are not wanting those who so try the minds of them that are
   in the ship, as to say that Christ [2555] was not born of a Virgin, nor
   had a real body, but seemed to the eyes what He was not. And these
   opinions of heretics have sprung up now, when the Name of Christ is
   already glorified throughout all nations; when Christ, that is, is as
   it were now walking on the sea. The disciples in their trial said, "It
   is a phantom." [2556] But He giveth us strength against these pestilent
   opinions by His own voice, "Be of good cheer, it is I; be not afraid."
   [2557] For men in vain fear have conceived these opinions concerning
   Christ, looking at his Honour and Majesty; and they think that He could
   not be so born, who hath deserved to be so Glorified, fearing Him as it
   were "walking on the sea." For by this action the excellency of His
   honour is figured; and so they think that He was a phantom. But when he
   saith, "It is I;" what else doth He say but that there is nothing in
   Him which does not really exist? Accordingly if He showeth His flesh,
   it is flesh; if bones, they are bones; if scars, they are scars. For
   "there was not in Him yea and nay, but in Him was yea," [2558] as the
   Apostle says. Hence that expression, "Be of good cheer, it is I; be not
   afraid." That is, do not so stand in awe of My Majesty, as to wish to
   take away the reality of My Being from Me. Though I walk upon the sea,
   though I have under My feet the elation and the pride of this world, as
   the raging waves, yet have I appeared as very Man, yet does My Gospel
   proclaim the very truth concerning Me, that I was born of a Virgin,
   that I am the Word made flesh; that I said truly, "Handle Me, and see,
   for a spirit hath not bones as ye see Me have," [2559] that they were
   true impresses of My wounds which the hands of the doubting Apostle
   handled. And therefore "It is I; be not afraid."

   9. But this, that the disciples thought He was a phantom, does not
   represent these only, does not designate them only who deny that the
   Lord had human flesh, and who sometimes by their blind perverseness
   disturb even those who are in the ship; but those also who think that
   the Lord has in anything spoken falsely, and who do not believe that
   the things which He has threatened the ungodly will come to pass. As
   though He were partly true, and partly false, appearing like a phantom
   in His words, as though He were something which is "yea and nay." But
   they who understand His voice aright, who saith, "It is I; be not
   afraid;" believe at once all the words of the Lord, so that as they
   hope for the rewards He promises, so do they fear the punishments He
   threatens. For as that is true which He will say to those who are set
   on the right hand, "Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom
   prepared for you from the foundation of the world;" [2560] so is that
   true, which they on the left hand will hear, "Depart ye into
   everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels." [2561] For
   this very opinion, by which men think that Christ's threatenings
   against the unrighteous and the abandoned are not true, has arisen from
   this, that they see many nations and multitudes innumerable subject to
   His Name; so that hence Christ appears to them to be a phantom, because
   He walked upon the sea; that is, He seems to speak falsely in His
   threats of punishment, because, as it were, He cannot destroy such
   numberless people who are subject to His Name and honour. But let them
   hear Him, saying, "It is I;" let them not therefore "be afraid," who
   believing Christ to be true in all things, not only seek after what He
   hath promised, but avoid also what He hath threatened; because though
   He walk upon the sea, that is, though all the nations of men in this
   world are subject unto Him; yet is He no phantom, and therefore He doth
   not speak falsely, when He saith, "Not every one that saith unto Me,
   Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven." [2562]

   10. What then does Peter's daring to come to Him on the waters also
   signify? For Peter generally stands for a figure of the Church. What
   else then do we think is meant by, "Lord, if it be Thou, bid me come
   unto Thee on the water;" [2563] but, Lord, if Thou art true, and in
   nothing speakest falsely, let Thy Church also be glorified in this
   world, because prophecy hath proclaimed this concerning Thee. Let her
   walk then on the waters, and so let her come to Thee, to whom it is
   said, "The rich among the people shall entreat Thy favour." [2564] But
   since to the Lord the praise of men is no temptation, but men are
   ofttimes in the Church disordered by human praises and honours, and
   well nigh sunk by them; therefore did Peter tremble in the sea,
   terrified at the great violence of the storm. For who does not fear
   those words, "They who call thee blessed cause thee to err, and disturb
   the ways of thy feet?" [2565] And because the soul hath much wrestling
   against the eager desire of human praise, good is it in such peril to
   betake one's self to prayer and earnest entreaty: lest haply he who is
   charmed with praise, be overwhelmed and sunk by blame. Let Peter cry
   out as he totters in the water, and say, "Lord, save me." For the Lord
   will reach forth His hand, and though He chide, saying, "O thou of
   little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" wherefore didst thou not
   look straight forward upon Him to whom thou wast making thy way, and
   glory only in the Lord? Nevertheless He will snatch him from the waves,
   and will not suffer Him to perish, who confesses his own infirmity, and
   begs His help. But when they had received the Lord into the ship, and
   their faith was strengthened and all doubt removed, and the tempests of
   the sea assuaged, so that they were come to a firm and secure landing,
   they all worship Him, saying, "Of a truth Thou art the Son of God." For
   this is that everlasting joy, where Truth made manifest, and the Word
   of God, and the Wisdom by which all things were made, and the exceeding
   height of His Mercy, are both known and loved.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2541] Causa.

   [2542] Matt. xiv. 33.

   [2543] Evidentiam.

   [2544] phantasma. Matt. xiv. 26.

   [2545] Submersionibus.

   [2546] Matt. xiv. 23.

   [2547] Rom. viii. 34.

   [2548] In sacramento.

   [2549] Eph. iv. 26, 27.

   [2550] John i. 9.

   [2551] Ex voce passionis ejus.

   [2552] Evanuerunt.

   [2553] Ps. lxix. 2.

   [2554] Phil. ii. 8.

   [2555] Manichees, Conf. B. v. 9 (16), 10 (20); B. ix. 3 (6).

   [2556] Matt. xiv. 26.

   [2557] Matt. xiv. 27.

   [2558] 2 Cor. i. 19.

   [2559] Luke xxiv. 39.

   [2560] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [2561] Matt. xxv. 41.

   [2562] Matt. vii. 21.

   [2563] Matt. xiv. 28.

   [2564] Ps. xlv. 12.

   [2565] Isa. iii. 12, Vulgate.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXVI.

   [LXXVI. Ben.]

   Again on Matt. xiv. 25: Of the Lord walking on the waves of the sea,
   and of Peter tottering.

   1. The Gospel which has just been read touching the Lord Christ, who
   walked on the waters of the sea; [2566] and the Apostle Peter, who as
   he was walking, tottered through fear, and sinking in distrust, rose
   again by confession, gives us to understand that the sea is the present
   world, and the Apostle Peter the type of the One Church. For Peter in
   the order of Apostles first, and in the love of Christ most forward,
   answers oftentimes alone for all the rest. Again, when the Lord Jesus
   Christ asked, whom men said that He was, and when the disciples gave
   the various opinions of men, and the Lord asked again and said, "But
   whom say ye that I am?" Peter answered, "Thou art the Christ, the Son
   of the living God." One for many gave the answer, Unity in many. Then
   said the Lord to Him, "Blessed art thou, Simon Barjonas: for flesh and
   blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but My Father which is in
   heaven." [2567] Then He added, "and I say unto thee." As if He had
   said, "Because thou hast said unto Me, Thou art the Christ the Son of
   the living God;' I also say unto thee, Thou art Peter.'" For before he
   was called Simon. Now this name of Peter was given him by the Lord, and
   that in a figure, that he should signify the Church. For seeing that
   Christ is the rock (Petra), Peter is the Christian people. For the rock
   (Petra) is the original name. Therefore Peter is so called [2568] from
   the rock; not the rock from Peter; as Christ is not called Christ from
   the Christian, but the Christian from Christ. "Therefore," he saith,
   "Thou art Peter; and upon this Rock" which thou hast confessed, upon
   this Rock which thou hast acknowledged, saying, "Thou art the Christ,
   the Son of the living God, will I build My Church;" that is upon
   Myself, the Son of the living God, "will I build My Church." I will
   build thee upon Myself, not Myself upon thee.

   2. For men who wished to be built upon men, said, "I am of Paul; and I
   of Apollos; and I of Cephas," [2569] who is Peter. But others who did
   not wish to be built upon Peter, but upon the Rock, said, "But I am of
   Christ." And when the Apostle Paul ascertained that he was chosen, and
   Christ despised, he said, "Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for
   you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?" [2570] And, as not in
   the name of Paul, so neither in the name of Peter; but in the name of
   Christ: that Peter might be built upon the Rock, not the Rock upon
   Peter.

   3. This same Peter therefore who had been by the Rock pronounced
   "blessed," bearing the figure of the Church, holding the chief place in
   the Apostleship, [2571] a very little while after that he had heard
   that he was "blessed," a very little while after that he had heard that
   he was "Peter," a very little while after that he had heard that he was
   to be "built upon the Rock," displeased the Lord when He had heard of
   His future Passion, for He had foretold His disciples that it was soon
   to be. He feared lest he should by death, lose Him whom he had
   confessed as the fountain of life. He was troubled, and said, "Be it
   far from Thee, Lord: this shall not be to Thee." [2572] Spare Thyself,
   O God, I am not willing that Thou shouldest die. Peter said to Christ,
   I am not willing that Thou shouldest die; but Christ far better said, I
   am willing to die for thee. And then He forthwith rebuked him, whom He
   had a little before commended; and calleth him Satan, whom he had
   pronounced "blessed." "Get thee behind Me, Satan," he saith, "thou art
   an offence unto Me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God,
   but those that be of men." [2573] What would He have us do in our
   present state, who thus findeth fault because we are men? Would you
   know what He would have us do? Give ear to the Psalm; "I have said, Ye
   are gods, and ye are all the children of the Most High." But by
   savouring the things of men; "ye shall die like men." [2574] The very
   same Peter a little while before blessed, afterwards Satan, in one
   moment, within a few words! Thou wonderest at the difference of the
   names, mark the difference of the reasons of them. Why wonderest thou
   that he who was a little before blessed, is afterwards Satan? Mark the
   reason wherefore he is blessed. "Because flesh and blood hath not
   revealed it unto thee, but My Father which is in heaven." [2575]
   Therefore blessed, because flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto
   thee. For if flesh and blood revealed this to thee, it were of thine
   own; but because flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but My
   Father which is in heaven, it is of Mine, not of thine own. Why of
   Mine? "Because all things that the Father hath are Mine." [2576] So
   then thou hast heard the cause, why he is "blessed," and why he is
   "Peter." But why was he that which we shudder at, and are loth to
   repeat, why, but because it was of thine own? "For thou savourest not
   the things which be of God, but those that be of men."

   4. Let us, looking at ourselves in this member of the Church,
   distinguish what is of God, and what of ourselves. For then we shall
   not totter, then shall we be founded on the Rock, shall be fixed and
   firm against the winds, and storms, and streams, the temptations, I
   mean, of this present world. Yet see this Peter, who was then our
   figure; now he trusts, and now he totters; now he confesses the
   Undying, and now he fears lest He should die. Wherefore? because the
   Church of Christ hath both strong and weak ones; and cannot be without
   either strong or weak; whence the Apostle Paul says, "Now we that are
   strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak." [2577] In that Peter
   said, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God," he represents
   the strong: but in that he totters, and would not that Christ should
   suffer, in fearing death for Him, and not acknowledging the Life, he
   represents the weak ones of the Church. In that one Apostle then, that
   is, Peter, in the order of Apostles first and chiefest, in whom the
   Church was figured, both sorts were to be represented, that is, both
   the strong and weak; because the Church doth not exist without them
   both.

   5. And hence also is that which was just now read, "Lord, if it be
   Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the water." [2578] For I cannot do this
   in myself, but in Thee. He acknowledged what he had of himself, and
   what of Him, by whose will he believed that he could do that, which no
   human weakness could do. Therefore, "if it be Thou, bid me;" because
   when thou biddest, it will be done. What I cannot do by taking it upon
   myself, [2579] Thou canst do by bidding me. And the Lord said "Come."
   [2580] And without any doubting, at the word of Him who bade him, at
   the presence of Him who sustained, at the presence of Him who guided
   him, without any delay, Peter leaped down into the water, and began to
   walk. He was able to do what the Lord was doing, not in himself, but in
   the Lord. "For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the
   Lord." [2581] What no one can do in Paul, no one in Peter, no one in
   any other of the Apostles, this can he do in the Lord. Therefore well
   said Paul by a wholesome despising of himself, and commending of Him;
   "Was Paul crucified for you, or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?"
   [2582] So then, ye are not in me, but together with me; not under me,
   but under Him.

   6. Therefore Peter walked on the water by the bidding of the Lord,
   knowing that he could not have this power of himself. By faith he had
   strength to do what human weakness could not do. These are the strong
   ones of the Church. Mark this, hear, understand, and act accordingly.
   For we must not deal with the strong on any other principle [2583] than
   this, that so they should become weak; but thus we must deal with the
   weak, that they may become strong. But the presuming on their own
   strength keeps many back from strength. No one will have strength from
   God, but he who feels himself weak of himself. "God setteth apart a
   spontaneous rain for His inheritance." [2584] Why do you, who know what
   I was about to say, anticipate me? Let your quickness be moderated,
   that the slowness of the rest may follow. This I said, and I say it
   again; hear it, receive it, and act on this principle. No one is made
   strong by God, but he who feels himself weak of his own self. And
   therefore a "spontaneous rain," as the Psalm says, "spontaneous;" not
   of our deserts, but "spontaneous." "A spontaneous rain" therefore "God
   setteth apart for his inheritance;" for "it was weak; but Thou hast
   perfected it." Because Thou "hast set apart for it a spontaneous rain,"
   not looking to men's deserts, but to Thine own grace and mercy. This
   inheritance then was weakened, and acknowledged its own weakness in
   itself, that it might be strong in Thee. It would not be strengthened,
   if it were not weak, that by Thee it might be "perfected" in Thee.

   7. See Paul a small portion of this inheritance, see him in weakness,
   who said, "I am not meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted
   the Church of God." Why then art thou an Apostle? "By the grace of God
   I am what I am. I am not meet, but by the grace of God I am what I am."
   Paul was "weak," but Thou hast "perfected" him. But now because by "the
   grace of God he is what he is," look what follows; "And His grace in me
   was not in vain, but I laboured more abundantly than they all." [2585]
   Take heed lest thou lose by presumption what thou hast attained [2586]
   through weakness. This is well, very well; that "I am not meet to be
   called an Apostle. By His grace I am what I am, and His grace in me was
   not in vain:" all most excellent. But, "I laboured more abundantly than
   they all;" thou hast begun, it would seem, to ascribe to thyself what a
   little before thou hadst given to God. Attend and follow on; "Yet not
   I, but the grace of God with me." Well! thou weak one; thou shalt be
   exalted in exceeding strength, seeing thou art not unthankful. Thou art
   the very same Paul, little in thyself; and great in the Lord. Thou art
   he who didst thrice beseech the Lord, that "the thorn of the flesh, the
   messenger of Satan, by whom thou wast buffeted, might be taken away
   from thee." [2587] And what was said to thee? what didst thou hear when
   thou madest this petition? "My grace is sufficient for thee: for My
   strength is made perfect in weakness." [2588] For he was "weak," but
   Thou didst "perfect" him.

   8. So Peter also said, "Bid me come unto Thee on the water." I who dare
   this am but a man, but it is no man whom I beseech. Let the God-man
   bid, that man may be able to do what man cannot do. "Come," said He.
   And He went down, and began to walk on the water; and Peter was able,
   because the Rock had bidden him. Lo, what Peter was in the Lord; what
   was he in himself? "When he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and
   beginning to sink, he cried out, Lord, I perish, save me." When he
   [2589] looked for strength from the Lord, he had strength from the
   Lord; as a man he tottered, but he returned to the Lord. "If I said, my
   foot hath slipped" [2590] (they are the words of a Psalm, the notes of
   a holy song; and if we acknowledge them they are our words too; yea, if
   we will, they are ours also). "If I said my foot hath slipped." How
   slipped, except because it was mine own. And what follows? "Thy mercy,
   Lord, helped me." Not mine own strength, but Thy mercy. For will God
   forsake him as he totters, whom He heard when calling upon Him? Where
   then is that, "Who hath called upon God, and hath been forsaken by
   Him?" [2591] where again is that, "Whosoever shall call on the Name of
   the Lord, shall be delivered." [2592] Immediately reaching forth the
   help of His right hand, He lifted him up as he was sinking, and rebuked
   his distrust; "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?"
   Once thou didst trust in Me, hast thou now doubted of Me?

   9. Well, brethren, my sermon must be ended. Consider the world to be
   the sea; the wind is boisterous, and there is a mighty tempest. Each
   man's peculiar lust is his tempest. Thou dost love God; thou walkest
   upon the sea, and under thy feet is the swelling of the world. Thou
   dost love the world, it will swallow thee up. It skilleth only how to
   devour its lovers, not to carry them. But when thy heart is tossed
   about by lust, in order that thou mayest get the better of thy lust,
   call upon the Divinity of Christ. Think ye that the wind is then
   contrary, when there is this life's adversity? For so when there are
   wars, when there is tumult, when there is famine, when there is
   pestilence, when even to every individual man his private calamity
   arriveth, then the wind is thought to be contrary, then it is thought
   that God must be called upon. But when the world wears her smile of
   temporal happiness, it is as if there were no contrary wind. But do not
   ask upon this matter the tranquil state of the times: ask only your own
   lust. See if there be tranquillity within thee: see if there be no
   inner wind which overturns thee; see to this. There needs great virtue
   to struggle with happiness, lest this very happiness allure, corrupt,
   and overthrow thee. There needs, I say, great virtue to struggle with
   happiness, and great happiness not to be overcome by happiness. Learn
   then to tread upon the world; remember to trust in Christ. And "if thy
   foot have slipped;" if thou totter, if some things there are which thou
   canst not overcome, if thou begin to sink, say, "Lord, I perish, save
   me." Say, "I perish," that thou perish not. For He only can deliver
   thee from the death of the body, who died in the body for thee. Let us
   turn to the Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2566] Matt. xiv. 25.

   [2567] Matt. xvi. 17, etc.

   [2568] Vide Sermon cclxx. 2, and ccxcv. 1.

   [2569] 1 Cor. i. 12.

   [2570] 1 Cor. i. 13.

   [2571] Apostolatus principatum.

   [2572] Matt. xvi. 22.

   [2573] Matt. xvi. 23.

   [2574] Ps. lxxxii. 6, 7.

   [2575] Matt. xvi. 17.

   [2576] John xvi. 15.

   [2577] Rom. xv. 1.

   [2578] Matt. xiv. 28.

   [2579] Præsumendo.

   [2580] Matt. xiv. 29.

   [2581] Eph. v. 8.

   [2582] 1 Cor. i. 13.

   [2583] Alibi.

   [2584] Ps. lxvii. 10, Sept. (lxviii. 9, English version).

   [2585] 1 Cor. xv. 9, etc.

   [2586] Meruisti.

   [2587] 2 Cor. xii. 7, 8.

   [2588] 2 Cor. xii. 9.

   [2589] Præsumsit de Domino.

   [2590] Ps. xciv. 18.

   [2591] Ecclus. ii. 10, Sept.

   [2592] Joel ii. 32.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXVII.

   [LXXVII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xv. 21,"Jesus went out thence, and
   withdrew into the parts of Tyre and Sidon. And behold, a Canaanitish
   woman," etc.

   1. This woman of Canaan, who has just now been brought before us in the
   lesson of the Gospel, shows us an example of humility, and the way of
   godliness; shows us how to rise from humility unto exaltation. Now she
   was, as it appears, not of the people of Israel, of whom came the
   Patriarchs, and Prophets, and the parents of the Lord Jesus Christ
   according to the flesh; of whom the Virgin Mary herself was, who was
   the Mother of Christ. This woman then was not of this people; but of
   the Gentiles. For, as we have heard, the Lord "departed into the coasts
   of Tyre and Sidon, and behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same
   coasts," [2593] and with the greatest earnestness begged of Him the
   mercy to heal her daughter, "who was grievously vexed with a devil."
   Tyre and Sidon were not cities of the people of Israel, but of the
   Gentiles; though they bordered on that people. So then, as being eager
   to obtain mercy she cried out, and boldly knocked; and He made as
   though He heard her not, [2594] not to the end that mercy might be
   refused her, but that her desire might be enkindled; and not only that
   her desire might be enkindled, but that, as I have said before, her
   humility might be set forth. Therefore did she cry, while the Lord was
   as though He heard her not, but was ordering in silence what He was
   about to do. The disciples besought the Lord for her, and said, "Send
   her away; for she crieth after us." And He said, "I am not sent, but
   unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel." [2595]

   2. Here arises a question out of these words; "If He was not sent but
   unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel, how came we from among the
   Gentiles into Christ's fold? What is the meaning of the so deep economy
   [2596] of this mystery, that whereas the Lord knew the purpose of His
   coming--that He might have a Church in all nations, He said that He was
   not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel'?" We
   understand then by this that it behoved Him to manifest His Bodily
   presence, His Birth, the exhibition of His miracles, and the power of
   His Resurrection, among that people: that so it had been ordained, so
   set forth from the beginning, so predicted, and so fulfilled; that
   Christ Jesus was to come to the nation of the Jews, to be seen and
   slain, and to gain from among them those whom He foreknew. For that
   people was not wholly condemned, but sifted. There was among them a
   great quantity of chaff, but there was also the hidden worth [2597] of
   the grain; there was among them that which was to be burnt, there was
   among them also that wherewith the barn was to be filled. For whence
   came the Apostles? whence came Peter? whence the rest?

   3. Whence was Paul himself, who was first called Saul? That is, first
   proud, afterwards humble? For when he was Saul, his name was derived
   from Saul: now Saul was a proud king; and in his reign he persecuted
   the humble David. [2598] So when he who was afterwards Paul, [2599] was
   Saul, he was proud, at that time a persecutor of the innocent, at that
   time a waster of the Church. For he had received letters from the chief
   priests (burning as he was with zeal for the synagogue, and persecuting
   the Christian name), that he might show up whatever Christians he
   should find, to be punished. [2600] While he is on his way, while he is
   breathing out slaughter, while he is thirsting for blood, he is thrown
   to the ground by the voice of Christ from heaven the persecutor, he is
   raised up the preacher. In him was fulfilled that which is written in
   the Prophet, "I will wound and I will heal." [2601] For that only in
   man doth God wound, which lifteth itself up against God. He is no
   unkind [2602] physician who opens the swelling, who cuts, or cauterizes
   the corrupted part. He gives pain, it is true; but he only gives pain,
   that he may bring the patient on to health. He gives pain; but if he
   did not, he would do no good. Christ then by one word laid Saul low,
   and raised up Paul; that is, He laid low the proud, and raised up the
   humble. For what was the reason of his change of name, that whereas he
   was afore called Saul, he chose afterwards to be called Paul; but that
   he acknowledged in himself that the name of Saul when he was a
   persecutor, had been a name of pride? He chose therefore a humble name;
   to be called Paul, that is, the least. For Paul is, "the least." Paul
   is nothing else but little. And now glorying in this name, and giving
   us a lesson [2603] of humility, he says, "I am the least of the
   Apostles." [2604] Whence then, whence was he, but of the people of the
   Jews? Of them were the other Apostles, of them was Paul, of them were
   they whom the same Paul mentions, as having seen the Lord after His
   resurrection. For he says, "That He was seen of above five hundred
   brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present,
   but some are fallen asleep." [2605]

   4. Of this people too, of the people of the Jews, were they, who when
   Peter was speaking, setting forth the Passion, and Resurrection, and
   Divinity of Christ (after that the Holy Ghost had been received, when
   all they on whom the Holy Ghost had come, spake with the tongues of all
   nations), being pricked in spirit as they heard him, sought counsel for
   their salvation, understanding as they did that they were guilty of the
   Blood of Christ; because they had crucified, and slain Him, in whose
   name though slain by them they saw such great miracles wrought; and saw
   the presence of the Holy Ghost. And so seeking counsel they received
   for answer; "Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of
   our Lord Jesus Christ, and your sins shall be forgiven you." [2606] Who
   should despair of the forgiveness of his sins, when the crime of
   killing Christ was forgiven to those who were guilty of it? They were
   converted from among this people of the Jews; were converted, and
   baptized. They came to the Lord's table, and in faith drank that Blood,
   which in their fury they had shed. Now in what sort they were
   converted, how decidedly, [2607] and how perfectly, the Acts of the
   Apostles show. "For they sold all that they possessed, and laid the
   prices of their things at the Apostles' feet; and distribution was made
   unto every man according as he had need; and no man said that ought was
   his own, but they had all things common." [2608] And, "They were," as
   it is written, "of one heart and of one soul." Lo here are the sheep of
   whom He said, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of
   Israel." For to them He exhibited His Presence, for them in the midst
   of their violence against Him He prayed as He was being crucified,
   "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." [2609] The
   Physician understood how those frenzied men were in their madness
   putting the Physician to death, and in putting their Physician to
   death, though they knew it not, were preparing a medicine for
   themselves. For by the Lord so put to death are all we cured, by His
   Blood redeemed, by the Bread of His Body delivered from famine. This
   Presence then did Christ exhibit to the Jews. And so He said, "I am not
   sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel;" that to them He
   might exhibit the Presence of His body; not that He might disregard,
   and pass over the sheep which He had among the Gentiles.

   5. For to the Gentiles He went not Himself, but sent His disciples. And
   in this was fulfilled what the Prophet said; "A people whom I have not
   known hath served Me." See how deep, how clear, how express the
   prophecy is; "a people whom I have not known," that is, to whom I have
   not exhibited My Presence, "hath served Me." How? It goes on to say,
   "By the hearing of the ear they have obeyed Me:" [2610] that is, they
   have believed, not by seeing, but by hearing. Therefore have the
   Gentiles the greater praise. For the others saw and slew Him; the
   Gentiles heard and believed. Now it was to call and gather together the
   Gentiles, that that might be fulfilled which we have just now chanted,
   "Gather us from among the Gentiles, that we may confess to Thy Name,
   and glory in Thy praise," [2611] that the Apostle Paul was sent. He,
   the least, made great, not by himself, but by Him whom he once
   persecuted, was sent to the Gentiles, [2612] from a robber become a
   shepherd, from a wolf a sheep. He, the least Apostle, was sent to the
   Gentiles, and laboured much among the Gentiles, and through him the
   Gentiles believed. His Epistles are the witnesses.

   6. Of this you have a very sacred figure in the Gospel also. A daughter
   of a ruler of the synagogue was really dead, and her father besought
   the Lord, that He would go to her; he had left her sick, and in extreme
   danger. [2613] The Lord set out to visit and heal the sick; in the mean
   time it was announced that she was dead, and it was told the father;
   "Thy daughter is dead, trouble not the Master." But the Lord who knew
   that He could raise the dead, did not deprive the despairing father of
   hope, and said to him, "Fear not: only believe." So he set out to the
   maiden; and in the way a certain woman, who had suffered from an issue
   of blood, and in her lengthened illness had spent to no purpose all
   that she had upon physicians, pressed herself in, how she could,
   amongst the crowds. When she touched the border of His garment, she was
   made whole. And the Lord said, "Who touched Me?" The disciples who knew
   not what had taken place, and saw that He was thronged by the
   multitudes, and that He was troubling Himself about one single woman
   who had touched Him gently, answered in astonishment, "The multitudes
   press Thee, and sayest Thou, Who touched Me? And He said, Somebody hath
   touched Me? for the other press, she hath touched. The many [2614] then
   rudely [2615] press the Body of Christ, few touch it healthfully.
   "Somebody," saith He, "hath touched Me, for I perceive that virtue is
   gone out of Me. And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she fell
   down at His feet," and confessed what had taken place. After this He
   set out again, and arrived whither He was going, and raised to life the
   young daughter of the ruler of the synagogue who was found to be dead.

   7. This was a literal fact, and was fulfilled as it is related; but
   nevertheless these very things which were done by the Lord had some
   further signification, being (if we may so say) a sort of visible and
   significative words. And this is especially plain, in that place where
   He sought fruit on the tree out of season, and because He found none,
   dried up the tree by His curse. [2616] Unless this action be regarded
   as a figure, there is no good meaning in it; first to have sought fruit
   on that tree when it was not the season for fruit on any tree; and then
   even if it were now the time of fruit, what fault in the tree was it to
   have none? But because it signified, that He seeketh not for leaves
   only, but for fruit also, that is, not for the words only, but for the
   deeds of men, by drying up that tree whereon he found only leaves, he
   signified their punishment who can speak good things, but will not do
   them. And so it is in this place also. For surely there is a mystery in
   it. He who foreknoweth all things saith, "Who touched Me?" The Creator
   maketh Himself like one who is ignorant; and He asketh, who not only
   knew this, but who even foreknew all other things. Doubtless there is
   something which Christ would speak to us in this significant mystery.

   8. That daughter of the ruler of the synagogue was a figure of the
   people of the Jews, for whose sake Christ had come, who said, "I am not
   sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel." But the woman who
   suffered from the issue of blood, figured the Church from among the
   Gentiles, to which Christ was not sent in His bodily presence. He was
   going to the former, He was intent on her recovery; meanwhile the
   latter runs to meet Him, touches His border as though He knew it not;
   that is, she is healed by Him who is in some sense absent. He saith,
   "Who touched Me?" as though He would say; I do not know this people; "A
   people whom I have not known hath served Me. Some one hath touched Me.
   For I perceive that virtue is gone out of Me;" that is, that My Gospel
   hath gone out and filled the whole world. Now it is the border that is
   touched, a small and outside [2617] part of the garment. Consider the
   Apostles as it were the garment of Christ. Among them Paul was the
   border; that is, the last and least. For he said of himself that he was
   both; "I am the least of the Apostles." [2618] For he was called after
   them all, he believed after them all, he healed more than they all. The
   Lord was not sent but "unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel." But
   because a "people whom He had not known, was also to serve Him, and to
   obey Him in the hearing of the ear," He made mention of them too when
   He was among the others. For the same Lord said in a certain place,
   "Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring,
   that there may be one fold and one shepherd." [2619]

   9. Of these was this woman; therefore she was not refused, but only put
   off. "I am not sent," saith He, "but unto the lost sheep of the house
   of Israel." And she was instant in her cries: she persevered, she
   knocked, as if she had already heard, "Ask, and receive; seek, and thou
   shalt find; knock, and it shall be opened unto thee." She kept on, she
   knocked. For so the Lord when He spake these words, "Ask, and ye shall
   receive; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto
   you;" [2620] had also said before, "Give not that which is holy unto
   the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample
   them under their feet, and turn again and rend you;" [2621] that is,
   lest after despising your pearls, they should even ill use you. [2622]
   Cast not therefore before them what they despise.

   10. And how distinguish we (as might be answered) who are "swine," and
   who are "dogs"? This has been shown in the case of this woman. For He
   only answered to her entreaties, "It is not meet to take the children's
   bread, and to cast it to dogs." [2623] Thou art a dog, thou art one of
   the Gentiles, thou worshippest idols. But for dogs what is so proper
   [2624] as to lick stones? "It is not" therefore "meet to take the
   children's bread, and to cast it to dogs." Had she retired after these
   words, she had gone away as she had come, a dog; but by knocking she
   was made of a dog one of human kind. [2625] For she persevered in
   asking, and from that reproach as it were she manifested her humility,
   and obtained mercy. For she was not excited, nor incensed, because she
   was called a dog, as she asked the blessing, and prayed for mercy, but
   she said, "Truth, Lord;" [2626] "Thou hast called me a dog, and truly a
   dog I am, I acknowledge my name: it is the Truth that speaks: but I
   ought not on that account to be refused this blessing. Verily I am a
   dog; yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters'
   table.' It is but a moderate and a small blessing I desire; I do not
   press to the table, I only seek for the crumbs."

   11. See, Brethren, how the value of humility is set before us! The Lord
   had called her a dog; and she did not say, "I am not," but she said, "I
   am." And because she acknowledged herself to be a dog, immediately the
   Lord said, "Woman, great is thy faith; be it unto thee even as thou
   hast asked." [2627] Thou hast acknowledged thyself to be a dog, I now
   acknowledge thee to be of human kind. "O woman, great is thy faith;"
   thou hast asked, and sought, and knocked; receive, find, be it opened
   unto thee. See, Brethren, how in this woman who was a Canaanite, that
   is, who came from among the Gentiles, and was a type, that is a figure,
   of the Church, the grace of humility has been eminently set before us.
   For the Jewish nation, to the end that it might be deprived of the
   grace of the Gospel, was puffed up with pride, because to them it had
   been vouchsafed [2628] to receive the Law, because out of this nation
   the Patriarchs had proceeded, the Prophets had sprung, Moses, the
   servant of God, had done the great miracles in Egypt which we have
   heard of in the Psalm, [2629] had led the people through the Red Sea,
   when the waters retired, and had received the Law, which he gave to
   this people. This was that whereupon the Jewish nation was lifted up,
   and through this very pride it happened that they were not willing to
   humble themselves to Christ the author of humility, and the restrainer
   of proud swelling, to God the Physician, who, being God, for this cause
   became Man, that man might know himself to be but man. O mighty remedy!
   If this remedy cure not pride, I know not what can cure it. He is God,
   and is made Man; He lays aside His Divinity, that is, in a manner
   sequestrates, [2630] hides, that is, what was His Own, and appears only
   in that He had taken to Him. Being God He is made man: and man will not
   acknowledge himself to be man, that is, will not acknowledge himself to
   be mortal, will not acknowledge himself to be frail, will not
   acknowledge himself to be a sinner, will not acknowledge himself to be
   sick, that so at least as sick he may seek the physician; but what is
   more perilous still, he fancies himself in sound health.

   12. So then for this reason that people did not come to Him, that is by
   reason of pride; and the natural branches are said to be broken off
   from the olive tree, that is from that people founded [2631] by the
   Patriarchs; in other words, the Jews are for their punishment justly
   barren through the spirit of pride; and the wild olive is grafted into
   that olive tree. The wild olive tree is the people of the Gentiles. So
   says the Apostle, "that the wild olive tree is grafted into the good
   olive tree, but the natural branches are broken off." [2632] Because of
   pride they were broken off: and the wild olive tree grafted in because
   of humility. This humility did the woman show forth when she said,
   "Truth, Lord," "I am a dog, I desire only the crumbs." In this humility
   also did the Centurion please Him; who when he desired that his servant
   might be healed by the Lord, and the Lord said, "I will come and heal
   him," answered, "Lord, I am not worthy that Thou shouldest come under
   my roof, but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed. I am
   not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof." [2633] He did not
   receive Him into his house, but he had received Him already in his
   heart. The more humble, the more capacious, and the more full. For the
   hills drive back the water, but the valleys are filled by it. And what
   then, what said the Lord to those who followed Him after that he had
   said, "I am not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof"? "Verily
   I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel;"
   that is, in that people to whom I came, "I have not found so great
   faith." And whence great? Great from being the least, that is, great
   from humility. "I have not found so great faith;" like a grain of
   mustard seed, which by how much smaller it is, by so much the more
   burning is it. Therefore did the Lord at once graft the wild olive into
   the good olive tree. He did it then when He said, "Verily I say unto
   you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel."

   13. Lastly, mark what follows. "Therefore,"--that is, because "I have
   not found so great faith in Israel," that is, so great humility with
   faith,--"Therefore I say unto you, that many shall come from the east
   and west, and shall sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the
   kingdom of heaven." [2634] "Shall sit," that is, "shall rest." For we
   must not form notions of carnal banquets there, or desire any such
   thing in that kingdom, as to change not vices for virtues, but only to
   make an exchange of vices. For it is one thing to desire the kingdom of
   heaven for the sake of wisdom and life eternal; another, for the sake
   of earthly felicity, as though there we should have it in more abundant
   and greater measure. If thou think to be rich in that kingdom, thou
   dost not cut off, but only changest desire; and yet rich thou wilt
   really be, and in none other place but there wilt thou be rich; for
   here thy want gathers together the abundance of things. Why have rich
   men much? Because they want much. A greater want heaps together as it
   were greater means; there want itself shall die. Then thou shalt be
   truly rich, when thou shalt be in want of nothing. For now thou art not
   surely rich, and an Angel poor, who has not horses, and carriages, and
   servants. Why? Because he does not want any of these: because in
   proportion to his greater strength, is his want the less. Therefore
   there there are riches, and the true riches. Figure not to yourselves
   then banquets of this earth in that place. For the banquets of this
   world are daily medicines; they are necessary for a kind of sickness we
   have, wherewith we are born. This sickness every one is sensible of,
   when the hour for refreshment is passed. Wouldest thou see how great a
   sickness this is, that as an acute fever would be fatal in seven days?
   Do not fancy thyself then to be in health. Immortality will be health.
   For this present is only one long sickness. Because thou dost support
   thy disease by daily medicines; thou fanciest thyself in health; take
   away the medicines, and then see what thou canst do.

   14. For from the moment we are born, we must needs be dying. This
   disease must needs bring us to death. This indeed physicians say when
   they examine their patients. For instance, "This man has the dropsy, he
   is dying; this disease cannot be cured. This man has the leprosy:
   [2635] this disease too cannot be cured. He is in a consumption. Who
   can cure this? He must needs die, he must perish." See, the physician
   has now pronounced that he is in a consumption; that he cannot but die;
   and yet sometimes the dropsical patient does not die of his disease,
   and the leprous does not die of his, nor the consumptive patient of
   his; but now it is absolutely necessary that every one who is born
   should die of this. He dies of it, he cannot do otherwise. This the
   physician and the unskilled both pronounce upon; and though he die
   somewhat more slowly, does he on that account not die? Where then is
   there true health, except where there is true immortality? But if it be
   true immortality, and no corruption, no wasting, what need will there
   be there of nourishment? Therefore, when you hear it said, "They shall
   sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;" [2636] get not your body, but
   your soul in order. There shall thou be filled; and this inner [2637]
   man has its proper food. In relation to it is it said, "Blessed are
   they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
   filled." [2638] And so truly filled shall they be that they shall
   hunger no more.

   15. Therefore did the Lord graft in at once the wild olive tree, when
   He said, "Many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down
   with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven;" that is,
   they shall be grafted into the good olive tree. For Abraham, and Isaac,
   and Jacob, are the roots of this olive tree; "but the children of the
   kingdom," that is, the unbelieving Jews, "shall go away into outer
   darkness." The "natural branches shall be broken off," that the "wild
   olive tree may be grafted in." Now why did the natural branches deserve
   to be cut off, except for pride? why the wild olive tree to be grafted
   in, except for humility? Whence also that woman said, "Truth, Lord, yet
   the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table."
   [2639] And thereupon she hears, "O woman, great is thy faith." [2640]
   And so again that centurion, "I am not worthy that Thou shouldest come
   under my roof." [2641] "Verily I say unto you, I have not found so
   great faith, no, not in Israel." [2642] Let us then learn, or let us
   hold fast, humility. If we have it not yet, let us learn it; if we have
   it, let us not lose it. If we have it not yet, let us have it, that we
   may be grafted in; if we have it already, let us hold it fast, that we
   may not be cut off.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2593] Matt. xv. 21 etc.

   [2594] Dissimulabatur ab ea.

   [2595] Matt. xv. 23, 24.

   [2596] Dispensatio.

   [2597] Dignitas.

   [2598] 1 Sam. xviii. 29.

   [2599] 1 Cor. i. 1.

   [2600] Acts ix. 1, etc.

   [2601] Deut. xxxii. 39.

   [2602] Impius.

   [2603] Commendans.

   [2604] 1 Cor. xv. 9.

   [2605] 1 Cor. xv. 6.

   [2606] Acts ii. 38.

   [2607] Planè.

   [2608] Acts iv. 32, etc.

   [2609] Luke xxiii. 34.

   [2610] Ps. xvii. 44, 45 (xviii. 43, 44, English version).

   [2611] Ps. cvi. 47.

   [2612] Acts ix. 15.

   [2613] Luke viii. 41, etc.

   [2614] Serm. xii. (lxii.) 5 (4).

   [2615] Molesti.

   [2616] Mark xi. 13, etc.

   [2617] Extrema.

   [2618] 1 Cor. xv. 9.

   [2619] John x. 16.

   [2620] Matt. vii. 7.

   [2621] Matt. vii. 6.

   [2622] Molesti.

   [2623] Matt. xv. 26.

   [2624] Familiare.

   [2625] Homo.

   [2626] Matt. xv. 27.

   [2627] Matt. xv. 28.

   [2628] Meruisset.

   [2629] Ps. cvi.

   [2630] Sequestrat.

   [2631] Creato.

   [2632] Rom. xi. 17, etc.

   [2633] Matt. viii. 7, etc.

   [2634] Matt. viii. 11.

   [2635] Elephantiosus.

   [2636] Matt. viii. 11.

   [2637] Interior venter.

   [2638] Matt. v. 6.

   [2639] Matt. xv. 27.

   [2640] Matt. xv. 28.

   [2641] Matt. viii. 8.

   [2642] Matt. viii. 10.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXVIII.

   [LXXVIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xvii. 1, "After six days Jesus taketh
   with Him Peter, and James, and John his brother," etc.

   1. We must now look into and treat of that vision which the Lord showed
   on the mount. For it is this of which He had said, "Verily I say unto
   you, there be some standing here which shall not taste of death till
   they see the Son of Man in His Kingdom." [2643] Then began the passage
   which has just been read. "When He had said this, after six days He
   took three disciples, Peter, and James, and John, and went up into a
   mountain." [2644] These three were those "some," of whom He had said,
   "There be some here which shall not taste of death, till they see the
   Son of Man in His kingdom." There is no small difficulty here. For that
   mount was not the whole extent of His kingdom. [2645] What is a
   mountain to Him who possesseth the heavens? Which we not only read He
   doth, but in some sort see it with the eyes of the heart. He calleth
   that His kingdom, which in many places He calleth the "kingdom of
   heaven." Now the kingdom of heaven is the kingdom of the saints. "For
   the heavens declare the glory of God." [2646] And of these heavens it
   is immediately said in the Psalm, "There is no speech nor language
   where their voice is not heard. Their sound is gone out through all the
   earth, and their words unto the end of the world." [2647] Whose words,
   but of the heavens? And of the Apostles, and all faithful preachers of
   the word of God. These heavens therefore shall reign together with Him
   who made the heavens. Now consider what was done, that this might be
   made manifest.

   2. The Lord Jesus Himself shone bright as the sun; His raiment became
   white as the snow; and Moses and Elias talked with Him. [2648] Jesus
   Himself indeed shone as the sun, signifying that "He is the light which
   lighteth every man that cometh into the world." [2649] What this sun is
   to the eyes of the flesh, that is He to the eyes of the heart; and what
   that is to the flesh of men, that is He to their hearts. Now His
   raiment is His Church. For if the raiment be not held together by him
   who puts it on, it will fall off. Of this raiment, Paul was as it were
   a sort of last border. For he says himself, "I am the least of the
   Apostles." [2650] And in another place, "I am the last of the
   Apostles." Now in a garment the border is the last and least part.
   Wherefore as that woman which suffered from an issue of blood, when she
   had touched the Lord's border was made whole, [2651] so the Church
   which came from out of the Gentiles, was made whole by the preaching of
   Paul. What wonder if the Church is signified by white raiment, when you
   hear the Prophet Isaiah saying, "Though your sins be as scarlet, I will
   make them white as snow"? [2652] Moses and Elias, that is, the Law and
   the Prophets, what avail they, except they converse with the Lord?
   Except they give witness to the Lord, who would read the Law or the
   Prophets? Mark how briefly the Apostle expresses this; "For by the Law
   is the knowledge of sin; but now the righteousness of God without the
   Law is manifested:" behold the sun; "being witnessed by the Law and the
   Prophets," [2653] behold the shining of the Sun.

   3. Peter sees this, and as a man savouring the things of men says,
   "Lord, it is good for us to be here." [2654] He had been wearied with
   the multitude, he had found now the mountain's solitude; there he had
   Christ the Bread of the soul. What! should he depart thence again to
   travail and pains, possessed of a holy love to Godward, and thereby of
   a good conversation? He wished well for himself; and so he added, "If
   Thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for Thee, and one
   for Moses, and one for Elias." To this the Lord made no answer; but
   notwithstanding Peter was answered. "For while he yet spake, a bright
   cloud came, and overshadowed them." [2655] He desired three
   tabernacles; the heavenly answer showed him that we have One, which
   human judgment desired to divide. Christ, the Word of God, the Word of
   God in the Law, the Word in the Prophets. Why, Peter, dost thou seek to
   divide them? It were more fitting for thee to join them. Thou seekest
   three; understand that they are but One.

   4. As the cloud then overshadowed them, and in a way made one
   tabernacle for them, "a voice also sounded out of the cloud, which
   said, This is My beloved Son." Moses was there; Elias was there; yet it
   was not said, "These are My beloved sons." For the Only Son is one
   thing; adopted sons another. He was singled out [2656] in whom the Law
   and the prophets glorified. "This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well
   pleased; hear Him!" Because ye have heard Him in the Prophets, and ye
   have heard Him in the Law. And where have ye not heard Him? "When they
   heard this, they fell" to the earth. See then in the Church is
   exhibited to us the Kingdom of God. Here is the Lord, here the Law and
   the Prophets; but the Lord as the Lord; the Law in Moses, Prophecy in
   Elias; only they as servants and as ministers. They as vessels: He as
   the fountain: Moses and the Prophets spake, and wrote; but when they
   poured out, they were filled from Him.

   5. But the Lord stretched out His hand, and raised them as they lay.
   And then "they saw no man, save Jesus only." [2657] What does this
   mean? When the Apostle was being read, you heard, "For now we see
   through a glass darkly, but then face to face." [2658] And "tongues
   shall cease," when that which we now hope for and believe shall come.
   In then that they fell to the earth, they signified that we die, for it
   was said to the flesh, "Earth thou art, and unto earth shalt thou
   return." [2659] But when the Lord raised them up, He signified the
   resurrection. After the resurrection, what is the Law to thee? what
   Prophecy? Therefore neither Moses nor Elias is seen. He only remaineth
   to thee, "Who in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
   and the Word was God." [2660] He remaineth to thee, "that God may be
   all in all." Moses will be there; but now no more the Law. We shall see
   Elias there too; but now no more the Prophet. For the Law and the
   Prophets have only given witness to Christ, that it behoved Him to
   suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day, and to enter
   into His glory. And in this glory is fulfilled what He hath promised to
   them that love Him, "He that loveth Me shall be loved of My Father, and
   I will love him." [2661] And as if it were said, What wilt Thou give
   him, seeing Thou wilt love him? "And I will manifest Myself unto him."
   Great gift! great promise! God doth not reserve for thee as a reward
   anything of His own, but Himself. O thou covetous one; why doth not
   what Christ promiseth suffice thee? Thou dost seem to thyself to be
   rich; yet if thou have not God, what hast thou? Another is poor, yet if
   he hath God, what hath he not?

   6. Come down, Peter: thou wast desiring to rest on the mount; come
   down, "preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove,
   rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and doctrine." [2662] Endure,
   labour hard, bear thy measure of torture; that thou mayest possess what
   is meant by the white raiment of the Lord, through the brightness and
   the beauty of an upright labouring in charity. For when the Apostle was
   being read we heard in praise of charity, "She seeketh not her own.
   [2663] She seeketh not her own;" since she gives what she possesses. In
   another place there is more danger in the expression, if you do not
   understand it right. For the Apostle, charging the faithful members of
   Christ after this rule of charity, says, "Let no man seek his own, but
   another's." [2664] For on hearing this, covetousness is ready with its
   deceits, that in a matter of business under pretence of seeking
   another's, it may defraud a man, and so, "seek not his own, but
   another's." But let covetousness restrain itself, let justice come
   forth; so let us hear and understand. It is to charity that it is said,
   "Let no man seek his own, but another's." Now, O thou covetous one, if
   thou wilt still resist, and twist the precept rather to this point,
   that thou shouldest covet what is another's; then lose what is thine
   own. But as I know thee well, thou dost wish to have both thine own and
   another's. Thou wilt commit fraud that thou mayest have what is
   another's; submit then to robbery that thou mayest lose thine own. Thou
   dost not wish to seek thine own, but then thou takest away what is
   another's. Now this if thou do, thou doest not well. Hear and listen,
   thou covetous one: the Apostle explains to thee in another place more
   clearly this that he said, "Let no man seek his own, but another's." He
   says of himself, "Not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many,
   that they may be saved." [2665] This Peter understood not yet when he
   desired to live on the mount with Christ. He was reserving this for
   thee, Peter, after death. But now He saith Himself, "Come down, to
   labour in the earth; in the earth to serve, to be despised, and
   crucified in the earth. The Life came down, that He might be slain; the
   Bread came down, that He might hunger; the Way came down, that life
   might be wearied in the way; the Fountain came down, that He might
   thirst; and dost thou refuse to labour? Seek not thine own.' Have
   charity, preach the truth; so shall thou come to eternity, where thou
   shalt find security."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2643] Matt. xvi. 28.

   [2644] Matt. xvii. 1; Luke ix. 28.

   [2645] Reguum comprehensum.

   [2646] Ps. xix. 1.

   [2647] Ps. xix. 3, 4.

   [2648] Matt. xvii. 2, 3.

   [2649] John i. 9.

   [2650] 1 Cor. xv. 9.

   [2651] Mark v. 34.

   [2652] Isa. i. 18.

   [2653] Rom. iii. 20, 21.

   [2654] Matt. xvii. 4.

   [2655] Matt. xvii. 5.

   [2656] Commendabatur.

   [2657] Matt. xvii. 7, 8.

   [2658] 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

   [2659] Gen. iii. 19, Sept.

   [2660] John i. 1.

   [2661] John xiv. 21.

   [2662] 2 Tim. iv. 2.

   [2663] 1 Cor. xiii. 5.

   [2664] 1 Cor. x. 24.

   [2665] 1 Cor. x. 33.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXIX.

   [LXXIX. Ben.]

   Again on the words of the Gospel, Matt. xvii., where Jesus showed
   Himself on the mount to His three disciples.

   1. We heard when the Holy Gospel was being read of the great vision on
   the mount, in which Jesus showed Himself to the three disciples, Peter,
   James, and John. "His face did shine as the sun:" this is a figure of
   the shining of the Gospel. "His raiment was white as the snow:" [2666]
   this is a figure of the purity of the Church, to which it was said by
   the Prophet, "Though your sins be as scarlet, I will make them white as
   snow." [2667] Elias and Moses were talking with Him; because the grace
   of the Gospel receives witness from the Law and the Prophets. The Law
   is represented in Moses, the Prophets in Elias; to speak briefly. For
   there are the mercies of God vouchsafed through a holy Martyr to be
   rehearsed. Let us give ear. Peter desired three tabernacles to be made,
   one for Moses, one for Elias, and one for Christ. The solitude of the
   mountain had charms for him; he had been wearied with the tumult of the
   world's business. But why sought he three tabernacles, but because he
   knew not as yet the unity of the Law, and of Prophecy, and of the
   Gospel? Lastly, he was corrected by the cloud, "While he yet spake,
   behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them." Lo, the cloud hath made one
   tabernacle; wherefore didst thou seek for three? "And a voice came out
   of the cloud, This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear
   ye Him." [2668] Elias speaketh; but "hear Him;" "Moses speaketh; but
   "hear Him." The Prophets speak, the Law speaketh; but "hear Him," who
   is the voice of the Law, and the tongue of the Prophets. He spake in
   them, and when He vouchsafed so to do, He appeared in His own person.
   "Hear ye Him:" let us then hear Him. When the Gospel spake, think it
   was the cloud: from thence hath the voice sounded out to us. Let us
   hear Him; that is, let us do what He saith, let us hope for what He
   hath promised.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2666] Matt. xvii. 2.

   [2667] Isa. i. 18.

   [2668] Matt. xvii. 5.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXX.

   [LXXX. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xvii. 19, "Why could not we cast it
   out"? etc., and on prayer.

   1. Our Lord Jesus Christ reproved unbelief even in His own disciples,
   as we heard just now when the Gospel was being read. For when they had
   said, "Why could not we cast him out?" He answered, "Because of your
   unbelief." [2669] If the Apostles were unbelievers, who is a believer?
   What must the lambs do, if the rams totter? Yet the mercy of the Lord
   did not disdain them in their unbelief; but reproved, nourished,
   perfected, crowned them. For they themselves, as mindful of their own
   weakness, said to Him, as we read in a certain place in the Gospel,
   "Lord, increase our faith. [2670] Lord," say they, "increase our
   faith." The knowing that they had a deficiency, was the first
   advantage; a greater happiness still, to know who it was of whom they
   were asking. "Lord," say they, "increase our faith." See, if they did
   not bring their hearts as it were to the fountain, and knocked that
   that might be opened to them, out of which they might fill them. For He
   would that men should knock at Him, not that He might repel those that
   knock, but that He might exercise those who long.

   2. For do you think, Brethren, that God doth not know what is needful
   for you? He knoweth and preventeth our desires, who knoweth our want.
   And so when He taught His disciples to pray, and warned them not to use
   many words in prayer, He saith, "Use not many words; for your Father
   knoweth what things ye have need of before ye ask Him." [2671] Now the
   Lord saith something different from this. What is this? Because He
   misliked that we should use many words in prayer, He said to us, "When
   ye pray, use not many words; for your Father knoweth what things ye
   have need of before ye ask Him." If our "Father knoweth what things we
   have need of before we ask Him," why do we use even few words? What is
   the use of prayer at all, if "our Father knoweth" already "what things
   we have need of"? He saith to one, Do not make thy prayer to Me at
   great length; for I know what is needful for thee. If so, Lord, why
   should I so much as pray at all? Thou wouldest not that I should use
   long prayers, yea rather Thou dost even bid me to use near none at all.
   And then what meaneth that precept in another place? For He who saith,
   "Use not many words in prayer," saith in another place, "Ask, and it
   shall be given you." [2672] And that thou mightest not think that this
   first precept to ask was given cursorily, He added, "Seek, and ye shall
   find." And that thou mightest not think that this too was cursorily
   given, see what He added further, see with what He finished. "Knock,
   and it shall be opened unto you:" see what He added. He would have thee
   ask that thou mayest receive, and seek that thou mayest find, and knock
   that thou mayest enter in. Seeing then that our Father knoweth already
   what is needful for us, how and why do we ask? why seek? why knock? why
   weary ourselves in asking, and seeking, and knocking, to instruct Him
   who knoweth already? And in another place the words of the Lord are,
   "Men ought always to pray, and not to faint." [2673] If men "ought
   always to pray," how doth He say, "Use not many words"? How can I
   always pray, if I so quickly make an end? Here Thou biddest me to
   finish quickly; there "always to pray and not to faint:" what doth this
   mean? Now that thou mayest understand this, "ask, seek, knock." For for
   this cause is it closed, not to shut thee out, but to exercise thee.
   Therefore, brethren, ought we to exhort to prayer, both ourselves and
   you. For other hope have we none amid the manifold evils of this
   present world, than to knock in prayer, to believe and to maintain the
   belief firm in the heart, that thy Father only doth not give thee what
   He knoweth is not expedient for thee. For thou knowest what thou dost
   desire; He knoweth what is good for thee. Imagine thyself under a
   physician, and in weak health, as is the very truth; for all this life
   of ours is a weakness; and a long life is nothing else but a prolonged
   weakness. Imagine thyself then to be sick under the physician's hand.
   Thou hast a desire to ask thy physician leave to drink a draught of
   fresh wine. Thou art not prohibited from asking, for it may chance to
   do thee no harm, or even good to receive it. Do not then hesitate to
   ask; ask, hesitate not; but if thou receive not, do not take it to
   heart. Now if thou wouldest act thus in the hands of a man, the
   physician of the body, how much more in the hands of God, who is the
   Physician, the Creator, and Restorer, both of thy body and soul?

   3. Wherefore, see how the Lord in this passage exhorted His disciples
   to prayer, when He said, "Ye could not cast out this devil because of
   your unbelief." [2674] For then exhorting them to prayer He ended thus;
   "this kind is not cast out but by prayer and fasting." If a man must
   pray, to cast out devils from another, how much more to cast out his
   own covetousness? how much more to cast out his own drunkenness? how
   much more to cast out his own luxuriousness? how much more to cast out
   his own uncleanness? How many things in a man are there, which if they
   are persevered in, allow of no admission into the kingdom of heaven!
   Consider, Brethren, how a physician is entreated for the preservation
   of temporal health, how, if any one is desperately ill, is he ashamed
   or slow to throw himself at a man's feet? to bathe in tears the
   footsteps of any very able chief physician? And what if the physician
   say to him, "Thou canst not else be cured, except I bind thee, and use
   the fire and knife"? He will answer," Do what thou wilt, only cure me."
   With what eagerness does he long for the health of a few days, fleeting
   as a vapour, that for it he is content to be bound, and submit to the
   fire, and knife, and to be watched, that he neither eat nor drink what,
   or when, he pleases! All this he will endure, that he may die a little
   later; and yet he will not endure ever so little, that he may never
   die. If God, who is the Heavenly Physician over us, saith to thee,
   "Wilt thou be cured?" what wouldest thou say but "Yes." Or it may be
   thou wouldest not say so, because thou fanciest thyself to be in
   health, that is, because thou art more grievously sick.

   4. For if we suppose two sick persons, one who implores the physician
   with tears, the other, who in his sickness with infatuation derides
   him; he will hold out hope to the one that weeps, and will deplore the
   case of the other that laughs. Why? but because the sounder in health
   he thinks himself, the more dangerous his sickness is! This was the
   case with the Jews. Christ came to them that were sick; He found them
   all sick. Let no one then flatter himself on his healthful state, lest
   the physician give him up. [2675] He found all sick; it is the
   Apostle's judgment, "For all have sinned, and come short of the glory
   of God." [2676] Though He found them all sick, yet were there two sorts
   of sick folk. The one came to the Physician, clave to Christ, heard,
   honoured, followed Him, were converted. He received all without
   disdaining any, for to heal them, who healed of free favour, who cured
   by Almighty power. When then He received them, and joined them to
   Himself to be healed, they rejoiced. But there was another sort of
   sick, who had already become infatuated through the sickness of
   iniquity, and did not know themselves to be sick; they mocked Him,
   because He received the sick, and said to His disciples, "Lo, what
   manner of man is your Master, who eateth with publicans and sinners."
   And He who knew what and who they were answered them, "They that be
   whole need not a physician, but they that are sick." And He showed them
   who the "whole" were, and who the "sick." "I am not come," He saith,
   "to call the righteous, but sinners." [2677] If sinners, He would say,
   do not come to Me, wherefore am I come? for whose sake am I come? If
   all are whole, wherefore hath so great a Physician come down from
   heaven? why hath He prepared for us a medicine not out of His stores,
   [2678] but of His own blood? That sort of sick then who had a milder
   sickness, who felt themselves to be sick, clave to the Physician, that
   they might be healed. But they whose sickness was more dangerous mocked
   the Physician, and abused the sick. Whither did their frenzy proceed at
   last? To seize the Physician, bind, scourge, crown Him with thorns,
   hang Him upon a Tree, kill Him on the Cross! Why dost thou marvel? The
   sick slew the Physician; but the Physician by being slain healed the
   frantic patient.

   5. For first, not forgetting on the Cross His own character, [2679] and
   manifesting forth His patience to us, and giving us an example of love
   to our enemies; as He saw them raging round Him, who had known their
   disease, seeing He was the Physician, who had known the frenzy by which
   they had become infatuated, He said at once to the Father, "Father,
   forgive them; for they know not what they do." [2680] Now suppose ye
   that those Jews were not malignant, cruel, bloody, turbulent, and
   enemies of the Son of God? Suppose ye that that cry, "Father, forgive
   them, for they know not what they do," was ineffectual and in vain? He
   saw them all, but He knew amongst them those that should one day be
   His. In a word, He died, because it was so expedient, that by His Death
   He might kill death. God died, that an exchange might be effected by a
   kind of heavenly contract, that man might not see death. For Christ is
   God, but He died not in that Nature in which He is God. For the same
   Person is God and man; for God and man is one Christ. The human nature
   [2681] was assumed, that we might be changed for the better; He did not
   degrade the Divine [2682] Nature down to the lower. For He assumed that
   which He was not, He did not lose that which He was. Forasmuch then as
   He is both God and man, being pleased that we should live by that which
   was His, He died in that which was ours. For He had nothing Himself,
   whereby He could die; nor had we anything whereby we could live. For
   what was He who had nothing whereby He could die? "In the beginning was
   the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." [2683] If
   thou seek for anything in God whereby He may die, thou wilt not find
   it. But we all die, who are flesh; men bearing about sinful flesh. Seek
   out for that whereby sin may live; it hath it not. So then neither
   could He have death in that which was His own, nor we life in that
   which was our own; but we have life from that which is His, He death
   from what is ours. What an exchange! What hath He given, and what
   received? Men who trade enter into commercial intercourse for exchange
   of things. For ancient commerce was only an exchange of things. A man
   gave what he had, and received what he had not. For example, he had
   wheat, but had no barley; another had barley, but no wheat; the former
   gave the wheat which he had, and received the barley which he had not.
   How [2684] simple it was that the larger quantity should make up for
   the cheaper sort! So then another man gives barley, to receive wheat;
   lastly, another gives lead, to receive silver, only he gives much lead
   against a little silver; another gives wool, to receive a ready-made
   garment. And who can enumerate all these exchanges? But no one gives
   life to receive death. Not in vain then was the voice of the Physician
   as He hung upon the tree. For in order that He might die for us because
   the Word could not die, "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us."
   [2685] He hung upon the Cross, but in the flesh. There was the
   meanness, [2686] which the Jews despised; there the dearness, [2687] by
   which the Jews were delivered. For for them was it said, "Father,
   forgive them, for they know not what they do." [2688] And that voice
   was not in vain. He died, was buried, rose again, having passed forty
   days with His disciples, He ascended into heaven, He sent the Holy
   Ghost on them, who waited for the promise. They were filled with the
   Holy Ghost, whom they had received, and began to speak with the tongues
   of all nations. Then the Jews who were present, amazed that unlearned
   and ignorant men, whom they had known as brought up among them with one
   tongue, should in the Name of Christ speak in all tongues, were in
   astonishment, and learnt from Peter's words whence this gift came. He
   gave it, who hung upon the tree. He gave it, who was derided as He hung
   upon the tree, that from His seat in heaven He might give the Holy
   Spirit. They of whom He had said, "Father, forgive them, for they know
   not what they do," heard, believed. They believed, were baptized, and
   their conversion was effected. What conversion? In faith they drank the
   Blood of Christ, which in fury they had shed.

   6. Therefore, to finish this discourse with that with which we began
   it, let us pray, and let us rely on God; let us live as He enjoineth;
   and when we totter in this life, let us call upon Him as the disciples
   called, saying, "Lord, increase our faith." [2689] Peter both put his
   trust in Him, and tottered; but notwithstanding he was not disregarded
   and left to sink, but was lifted up and raised. For his trust whence
   was it? Not from anything of his own; but from what was the Lord's.
   How? "Lord, if it be Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the water." For on
   the water was the Lord walking. "If it be Thou, bid me come unto Thee
   on the water." For I know that if it be Thou, Thou biddest, and it is
   done. "And He saith, Come." He went down at His bidding, but in his own
   weakness he was afraid. Nevertheless when he was afraid, he cried out,
   "Lord, save me." Then the Lord took him by the hand, and said, "O thou
   of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?" [2690] He first invited
   him, He delivered him, as he tottered, and stumbled; that it might be
   fulfilled which was said in the Psalm, "If I said my foot hath slipped,
   Thy mercy, O Lord, aided me." [2691]

   7. There are then two kinds of blessings, temporal and eternal.
   Temporal blessings are health, substance, honour, friends, a home,
   children, a wife, and the other things of this life in which we are
   sojourners. Put we up then in the hostelry of this life as travellers
   passing on, and not as owners intending to remain. But eternal
   blessings are, first, eternal life itself, the incorruption and
   immortality of body and soul, the society of Angels, the heavenly city,
   glory [2692] unfailing, Father and father-land, the former without
   death, the latter without a foe. These blessings let us desire with all
   eagerness, let us ask with all perseverance, not with length of words,
   but with the witness of groans. Longing desire prayeth always, though
   the tongue be silent. If thou art ever longing, thou art ever praying.
   When sleepeth prayer? When desire groweth cold. So then let us beg for
   these eternal blessings with all eager desire, let us seek for those
   good things with an entire earnestness, let us ask for those good
   things with all assurance. For those good things do profit him that
   hath them, they cannot harm him. But those other temporal good things
   sometimes profit, and sometimes harm. Poverty hath profited many, and
   wealth hath harmed many; a private life hath profited many, and exalted
   honour hath harmed many. And again, money hath profiled some,
   honourable distinction hath profited some; profited them who use them
   well; but from those who use them ill, the not withdrawing them hath
   harmed them more. And so, Brethren, let us ask for those temporal
   blessings too, but in moderation, being sure that if we do receive
   them, He giveth them, who knoweth what is expedient for us. Thou hast
   asked, and what thou hast asked, hath not been given thee? Trust thy
   Father, who would give it thee, were it expedient for thee. Lo! judge
   in this case by thine own self. For such as thy son who knows not the
   ways of men is in regard to thee, such in regard to the Lord art thou
   thyself, who knowest not the things of God. Lo, thy son cries a whole
   day before thee, that thou wouldest give him a knife, or a sword; thou
   dost refuse to give it him, thou wilt not give it, thou disregardest
   his tears, lest thou shouldest have to bewail his death. Let him cry,
   and beat himself, or throw himself upon the ground, that thou mayest
   set him on horseback; thou wilt not do it, because he does not know how
   to govern the horse, he may throw and kill him. To whom thou refusest a
   part, thou art reserving the whole. But that he may grow up, and
   possess the whole in safety, thou givest him not that little thing
   which is full of peril to him.

   8. And so, Brethren, we say, pray as much as ye are able. Evils abound,
   and God hath willed that evils should abound. Would that evil men did
   not abound, and then evils would not abound. Bad times! troublesome
   times! this men are saying. Let our lives be good; and the times are
   good. We make our times; such as we are, such are the times. But what
   can we do? We cannot, it may be, convert the mass of men to a good
   life. But let the few who do give ear live well; let the few who live
   well endure the many who live ill. They are the corn, they are in the
   floor; in the floor they can have the chaff with them, they will not
   have them in the barn. Let them endure what they would not, that they
   may come to what they would. Wherefore are we sad, and blame we God?
   Evils abound in the world, in order that the world may not engage our
   love. Great men, faithful saints were they who have despised the world
   with all its attractions; [2693] we are not able to despise it even
   disfigured as it is. The world is evil, lo, it is evil, and yet it is
   loved as though it were good. But what is this evil world? For the
   heavens and the earth, and the waters, and the things that are therein,
   the fish, and birds, and trees, are not evil. All these are good: but
   it is evil men who make this evil world. Yet as we cannot be without
   evil men, let us, as I have said, whilst we live pour out our groans
   before the Lord our God, and endure the evils, that we may attain to
   the things that are good. Let us not find fault with the Master of the
   household; for He is loving to us. He beareth us, and not we him. He
   knoweth how to govern what He made; do what He hath bidden, and hope
   for what He hath promised.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2669] Matt. xvii. 19, 20.

   [2670] Luke xvii. 5.

   [2671] Matt. vi. 7, 8.

   [2672] Matt. vii. 7.

   [2673] Luke xviii. 1.

   [2674] Matt. xvii. 19, 20.

   [2675] Renuntiet ad illum.

   [2676] Rom. iii. 23.

   [2677] Matt. ix. 11, etc.

   [2678] Armario suo.

   [2679] Personam suam.

   [2680] Luke xxiii. 34.

   [2681] Homo.

   [2682] Deum.

   [2683] John i. 1.

   [2684] Quanti erat.

   [2685] John i. 14.

   [2686] Vilitas.

   [2687] Caritas.

   [2688] Luke xxiii. 34.

   [2689] Luke xvii. 5.

   [2690] Matt. xiv. 28, etc.

   [2691] Ps. xciv. 18.

   [2692] Dignitas.

   [2693] Speciosum.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXI.

   [LXXXI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xviii. 7, where we are admonished to
   beware of the offences of the world.

   1. The divine lessons, which we have just heard as they were being
   read, warn us to gather in a stock of virtues, to fortify a Christian
   heart, against the offences which were predicted to come, and this from
   the mercy of the Lord. "For what is man," saith Scripture, "saving that
   Thou art mindful of him?" [2694] "Woe unto the world because of
   offences," [2695] saith the Lord; the Truth says so; He alarmeth and
   warneth us, He would not have us to be off our guard; for surely He
   would not make us desperate. Against this "woe," against this evil,
   that is, which is to be feared, and dreaded, and guarded against,
   Scripture counsels, and exhorts, and instructs us in that place, where
   it is said, "Great praise have they who love Thy law, and nothing is an
   offence to them." [2696] He hath shown us an enemy to be guarded
   against, but He hath not omitted to show us also a wall of defence.
   Thou wast thinking, as thou heardest, "Woe unto the world because of
   offences," whither thou mightest go beyond the world, that thou
   mightest not be exposed to offences. Therefore to avoid offences,
   whither wilt thou go beyond the world, unless thou fly to Him who made
   the world? And how shall we be able to fly to Him who made the world,
   unless we give ear to His law which is preached everywhere? And to give
   ear to it is but a small matter, unless we love it. For divine
   Scripture in making thee secure against offences doth not say, "Great
   peace have they who" hear "Thy law. For not the hearers of the law are
   just before God. [2697] But" because "the doers of the law shall be
   justified," and, "faith worketh by love:" [2698] it saith, "Great peace
   have they who love Thy law, and nothing is an offence to them." To this
   sentiment also agrees the passage which we have chanted in course; "But
   the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the
   abundance of peace." [2699] Because, "great peace have they who love
   Thy law." For these "meek" ones are they who "love the law of God."
   For, "Blessed is the man whom Thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest him
   out of Thy law, that Thou mayest give him rest from the days of
   adversity, until the pit be digged for the sinner." [2700] How diverse
   seem those words of Scripture, yet into one meaning do they so flow and
   meet together, that whatsoever out of that most rich fountain thou
   canst hear, so that thou acquiesce therein, and art in loving harmony
   with the truth, thou will be at once filled with peace; glowing with
   love, and fortified against offences.

   2. It is our place then to see, or seek, or learn, how we must be
   "meek;" and we are guided by that which I have just brought forward out
   of the Scriptures, to find what we are in quest of. Be attentive then,
   Beloved, for a little while; it is a weighty matter that is in hand,
   that we may be meek; a necessary thing in the adversities of life. But
   it is not the adverse circumstances of this life which are called
   offences; but mark what "offences" are. A man, for instance, under some
   hard necessity is weighed down by a press of trouble. That he is
   weighed down with a press of trouble, is no offence. By such pressure
   were even Martyrs pressed, but not oppressed. Of an offence beware, but
   of a press of trouble not so much. The last presseth thee, an offence
   oppresseth thee. What then is the difference between the two? In the
   press of trouble thou didst make ready to maintain patience, to hold
   fast constancy, not to abandon faith, not to consent to sin. This if
   thou maintain, or shall have maintained, the trouble that presseth thee
   shall not be thy fall; but that press of trouble shall avail to the
   same end as in the oil press, not to destroy the olive, but to extract
   the oil. In a word, if in this trouble that presseth thee thou ascribe
   praise unto God, how useful will the press be to thee, whereby such oil
   is pressed out! Under such a press the Apostles sat in chains, and in
   that press they sang a hymn to God. What precious oil was this that was
   pressed and forced out! Beneath a heavy press did Job sit on the
   dunghill, without resource, without help, without substance, without
   children; full, but of worms only, as far, that is, as concerned the
   outward man, but because he too was full of God within, he praised God,
   and that press was no "offence" to him. Where then was the "offence"?
   When his wife came to him and said, "Speak a word against God, and
   die." [2701] When all had been taken from him by the devil, an Eve was
   reserved for the exercised sufferer, not to console but to tempt her
   husband. See then where the offence was. She exaggerated his miseries,
   and her miseries too with his, and began to persuade him to blaspheme.
   But he who was "meek," because "God had taught him out of His law, and
   given him rest from the days of adversity;" had "great peace" in his
   heart as "loving the law of God, and nothing was an offence to him."
   She was an offence, but not to him. In a word, behold the meek man,
   behold one taught in the law of God, the eternal law of God I mean. For
   that law on tables was not yet given to the Jews in the time of Job,
   but in the hearts of the godly there remained still the eternal law,
   from which that which was given to the people was copied. Because then
   by the law of God he had "rest given him from the days of adversity,"
   and "had great peace as loving the law of God," behold how "meek" he
   is, and what he answers. Learn hereby what I propose to enquire; who
   are the meek. "Thou speakest," he says, "as one of the foolish women
   speaketh. If we have received good from the hand of the Lord, shall we
   not bear the evil?" [2702]

   3. We have heard by an example who the meek are: let us, if we can,
   define them in words. The meek are they, to whom in all their good
   deeds, in all the things they do well, nothing is pleasing but God; to
   whom in all the evils they suffer, God is not displeasing. Now,
   Brethren, attend to this rule, to this pattern; let us stretch
   ourselves out to it, let us seek for increase, that we may fill it. For
   what does it profit, that we plant, and water, except God shall give
   the increase? "For neither is he that planteth anything, neither he
   that watereth; but God that giveth the increase." [2703] Give ear,
   whosoever thou art, that wouldest be "meek," who wouldest have "rest
   from the days of adversity, who lovest the law of God," that there may
   be "no offence unto thee," and that thou mayest "have great peace,"
   that thou mayest "possess the earth, and delight in the multitude of
   peace;" give ear, whosoever thou art that wouldest be "meek."
   Whatsoever good thou doest, be not pleased with thyself. "For God
   resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble." [2704] So then
   whatever good thou doest, let nought but God be pleasing to thee;
   whatever evil thou sufferest, let not God be displeasing to thee. What
   needest thou more? Do this, and thou shalt live. The days of adversity
   shall not overwhelm thee; thou shall escape that which is said, "Woe
   unto the world because of offences." For to what world is there woe
   because of offences, but to that of which it is said, "And the world
   knew Him not?" [2705] Not to that world of which it is said, "God was
   in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself." [2706] There is an evil
   world, and there is a good world; the evil world, are all the evil men
   in this world; and the good world, all the good in this world. As we
   observe frequently with a field. This field is full: of what? Of wheat.
   Yet we say also, and say truly too, This field is full of chaff. So
   with a tree, it is full of fruit. Another says, it is full of leaves.
   And both he who says it is full of fruit, says true; and he who says it
   is full of leaves, says true. Neither has the full display of leaves
   taken away the room for the fruit, nor the full display of the fruit
   driven off the abundance of leaves. It is full of both; but the one the
   wind searcheth out, the other the husbandman gathereth in. So therefore
   when thou dost hear, "Woe unto the world because of offences," be not
   afraid; "love the law of God, nothing shall be an offence to thee."

   4. But thy wife comes to thee advising thee to some evil thing. Thou
   dost love her as a wife should be loved; she is one of thy members.
   "But if thine eye offend thee, if thine hand offend thee, if thy foot
   offend thee," thou hast just heard the Gospel, "cut them off, and cast
   them from thee." [2707] Whosoever he be that is dear to thee, whosoever
   he be that is held in high estimation by thee, let him be so long of
   high esteem with thee, so long thy beloved member, as he shall not
   begin to offend thee, that is, to advise thee to any evil. Hear now how
   that this is the meaning of "offence." I have brought forward the
   example of Job and his wife; but there the word "offence" did not
   occur. Hear the Gospel: when the Lord prophesied of His Passion, Peter
   began to persuade him not to suffer. "Get thee behind Me, Satan, thou
   art an offence to Me." [2708] Here undoubtedly the Lord who hath given
   thee an example of life, hath taught thee both what an "offence" is,
   and how an offence is to be avoided. Him to whom He had a little while
   before said, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona;" [2709] He had shown to
   be His member. But when he begins to be an offence, He cuts off the
   member; only He restored the member, and put it into its place again.
   He then will be an "offence" to thee, who shall begin to persuade thee
   to any evil thing. And here, Beloved, take heed; this takes place for
   the most part not through any evil will, but through a mistaken good
   will. Thy friend who loves thee, and is loved by thee again, thy
   father, thy brother, thy child, thy wife, sees thee in an evil case,
   and would have thee do what is evil. What do I mean by "sees thee in an
   evil case"? Sees thee in some press of trouble. This pressure it may be
   thou art suffering for righteousness' sake; art suffering it because
   thou will not give false witness. I would speak merely by way of
   illustration. Examples abound; for "woe to the world, because of
   offences." See, for instance, some powerful person, to cover his rapine
   and plunder, asks of you the service of a false witness. You refuse:
   refuse the false oath, lest thou shouldest deny Him that is true. That
   I may not dwell long on this, he is angry, he is powerful, he oppresses
   thee: a friend comes who would not have thee in this press of trouble,
   in this evil case; "I pray thee, do what is told thee; what great
   matter is it?" And then perhaps as Satan with the Lord, "It is written
   of Thee, He shall give His Angels charge concerning Thee, that Thou
   dash not Thy foot against a stone." [2710] Perhaps too this friend of
   thine, because he sees thou art a Christian, wishes to persuade thee
   out of the Law to do what he thinks you ought to do. "Do what the other
   tells." "What? Do what the other wishes." "But it is a lie, it is
   false." "Well, have you not read, All men are liars'?" [2711] Now is he
   an "offence." He is a friend, what will you do? He is an eye, he is a
   hand: "Cut it off, and cast it from thee." What is, "cut it off, and
   cast it from thee"? Consent not to him. For members in our body make up
   unity by consent, by consent they live, by consent are joined together
   one with the other. Where there is dissent, there is disease, or a
   sore. He is then one of thy members; thou wilt love him. But he is an
   offence to thee; "Cut him off, and cast him from thee." Consent not to
   him; drive him off from thine ears, it may be he will return amended.

   5. And how wilt thou do this that I say, "Cut him off, and cast him
   from thee," and so, it may be, amend him? answer me, how thou art going
   to do it? He wished to persuade thee out of the Law to tell a lie. For
   he said, "speak." And perhaps he did not dare to say, "speak a lie;"
   but thus, "speak what the other wishes." Thou sayest, "But it is a
   lie." And he to excuse it, says, "All men are liars." Then do thou, my
   brother, say against this, "The mouth that lieth slayeth the soul."
   [2712] Mark, it is no light thing thou hast heard, "The mouth that
   lieth slayeth the soul." What can that powerful enemy, who oppresseth
   me, do to me, that thou pitiest me, and my condition, and wouldest not
   have me be in this evil case; whereas thou wouldest that I should be
   evil? What can that powerful man do to me, and what can he oppress? The
   flesh. He can oppress thy body, thou wilt say: I grant he may oppress
   it to destruction. [2713] Still how much more mildly does he deal with
   me, than I should with myself were I to lie! He kills my flesh; I kill
   my soul. He in his power and anger slays the body; "the mouth that
   lieth slayeth the soul." He slays the body; and die it must, though it
   should not be slain; but the soul which iniquity slayeth not, the truth
   receiveth for ever. Preserve then what thou canst preserve; and let
   that perish which must perish sometime or other. Thou hast given an
   answer then, but thou hast not solved the "All men are liars." Make
   answer to him to this too, that he may not fancy that he has said
   anything to persuade to lying, in bringing a testimony out of the Law;
   so urging thee out of the Law against the Law. For it is written in the
   Law, "Thou shalt not bear false witness;" [2714] and it is written in
   the Law, "All men are liars." Recur then to that which I just lately
   suggested, when I defined in words as best I could the "meek" man. He
   is "meek" to whom in all things that he does well, nothing but God is
   pleasing, and in all the evils which he suffers, God is not
   displeasing. Make answer then to him who says, Lie, for it is written,
   "All men are liars:" I will not lie, for it is written, "The mouth that
   lieth slayeth the soul." I will not lie, because it is written, "Thou
   shalt destroy them that speak lying." [2715] I will not lie, because it
   is written, "Thou shalt not bear false witness." Though he whom I
   displease by the truth harass my body with oppressions, I will give ear
   to my Lord, "Fear not them which kill the body." [2716]

   6. "How then are all men liars? What! Thou art not a man, I suppose?"
   Answer quickly and truly. "And O that I may not be a man, that so I may
   not be a liar." For see; "God looked down from heaven upon the children
   of men, to see if there were any that did understand, and seek after
   God. They are all gone out of the way, they are all together become
   unprofitable: there is none that doeth good, no not even one." [2717]
   Why? Because they wished to be sons of men. But in order that he might
   deliver them from these iniquities, cure, heal, change, the sons of
   men; "he gave them power to become the sons of God." [2718] What marvel
   then! Ye were men, if we were the sons of men; ye were all men, and
   were liars, for, "All men are liars." The grace of God came to you, and
   "gave you power to become the sons of God." Hear the voice of My Father
   saying, "I have said, Ye are gods; and ye are all the children of the
   Most High." [2719] Since then they are men, and the sons of men, if
   they are not the children of the Most High, they are liars, for, "all
   men are liars." If they are the sons of God, if they have been redeemed
   by the Saviour's grace, if purchased with His precious Blood, if born
   again of water and of the Spirit, if predestinated to the inheritance
   of heaven, then indeed are they children of God. And so thereby are
   gods. What then would a lie have to do with thee? For Adam was a mere
   man, Christ, man and God; God, the Creator of all creation. Adam a mere
   man, the Man Christ, the Mediator with God, the Only Son of the Father,
   the God-man. Lo, thou, O man, art far from God, and God is far above
   man; between them the God-man placed Himself. Acknowledge Christ, and
   by Him as Man ascend up to God.

   7. Being then now reformed, and, if my words have been so blessed,
   "meek," let us "hold fast our profession without wavering." Let us love
   the law of God, that we may escape that which is written, "Woe unto the
   world because of offences." Now I would say a few words about
   "offences," of which the world is full, and how it is that offences
   thicken, pressing troubles abound. The world [2720] is laid waste, the
   winepress is trodden. Ah! Christians, heavenly shoot, ye strangers on
   the earth, who seek a city in heaven, who long to be associated with
   the holy Angels; understand that ye have come here on this condition
   only, that ye should soon depart. Ye are passing on through the world,
   endeavouring to reach Him who created it. Let not the lovers of the
   world, who wish to remain in the world, and yet, whether they will or
   no, are compelled to move from it; let them not disturb you, let them
   not deceive nor seduce you. These pressing troubles are not offences.
   Be ye righteous, and they will be only exercises. Tribulation comes; it
   will be as ye choose it, either an exercise, or a condemnation. Such as
   it shall find you to be, will it be. Tribulation is a fire; does it
   find thee gold? it takes away the filth: does it find thee chaff? it
   turns it into ashes. The pressing troubles then which abound are not
   "offences." But what are "offences"? Those expressions, those words in
   which we are thus addressed. "See what Christian times bring about;"
   lo, these are the true offences. For this is said to thee, to this end,
   that if thou love the world, thou mayest blaspheme Christ. And this he
   saith to thee who is thy friend, and counsellor; and so "thine eye."
   This he saith to thee who ministereth to thee, and shareth thy labours,
   and so "thine hand." This he saith to thee it may be who supporteth
   thee, who lifteth thee up from a low earthly state; and so "thy foot."
   Cast them all aside, cut them off, throw them all away from thee;
   consent not unto them. Answer such men, as he who was advised to give
   false witness answered. So do thou answer too; say to the man who saith
   to thee, "See, it is in Christian times that there are such pressing
   troubles; that the whole world is laid waste;" answer him, "And this
   Christ foretold me, before it came to pass."

   8. For wherefore art thou disturbed? Thine heart is disturbed by the
   pressing troubles of the world, as that ship was, in which Christ was
   asleep. Lo! what is the cause, stout-hearted man, that thy heart is
   disturbed? That ship in which Christ is asleep, [2721] is the heart in
   which faith is asleep. For what new thing, what new thing, I ask, is
   told thee, Christian? "In Christian times is the world laid waste, the
   world is failing." Did not thy Lord tell thee, the world shall be laid
   waste? Did not thy Lord tell thee, the world shall fail? Why when the
   promise was made, didst thou believe, and art disturbed now, when it is
   being completed? So then the tempest beats furiously against thine
   heart; beware of shipwreck, awake up Christ. The Apostle says, "that
   Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith." [2722] Christ dwelleth in
   thee by faith. Present faith, is Christ present; waking faith, is
   Christ awake; slumbering [2723] faith, is Christ asleep. Arise and stir
   thyself; say, "Lord, we perish." See what the Heathen say to us; and
   what is worse, what evil Christians say! Awake up, O Lord, we perish.
   Let thy faith awake, and Christ begins to speak to thee. "Why art thou
   troubled?' I told thee beforehand of all these things. I foretold them,
   that when evils came, thou mightest hope for good things, that thou
   mightest not faint in the evil." Wonderest thou that the world is
   failing? Wonder that the world is grown old. It is as a man who is
   born, and grows up, and waxes old. There are many complaints in old
   age; the cough, the rheum, the weakness of the eyes, fretfulness, and
   weariness. So then as when a man is old; he is full of complaints; so
   is the world old; and is full of troubles. Is it a little thing that
   God hath done for thee, in that in the world's old age, He hath sent
   Christ unto thee, that He may renew thee then, when all is failing?
   Dost thou not know that He notified this in the seed of Abraham? "The
   seed of Abraham," says the Apostle, "which is Christ. He saith not, And
   to seeds, as of many; but as of One, And to thy seed, which is Christ."
   [2724] Therefore was there a son born to Abraham in his old age,
   because in the old age of this world was Christ to come. He came when
   all things were growing old, and made them new. As a made, created,
   perishing thing, the world was now declining to its fall. It could not
   but be that it should abound in troubles; He came both to console thee
   in the midst of present troubles, and to promise thee everlasting rest.
   Choose not then to cleave to this aged world, and to be unwilling to
   grow young in Christ, who telleth thee, "The world is perishing, the
   world is waxing old, the world is failing; is distressed by the heavy
   breathing of old age. But do not fear, "Thy youth shall be renewed as
   the eagle's." [2725]

   9. See, they say, in Christian times it is that Rome perishes. Perhaps
   Rome is not perishing; perhaps she is only scourged, not utterly
   destroyed; perhaps she is chastened, not brought to nought. It may be
   so; Rome will not perish, if the Romans do not perish. And perish they
   will not if they praise God; perish they will if they blaspheme Him.
   For what is Rome, but the Romans? For the question is not of her wood
   and stones, of her lofty insulated [2726] palaces, and all her spacious
   walls. All this was made only on this condition that it should fall
   some other day. When man built it, he laid stone on stone; and when man
   destroyed it, he removed stone from stone. Man made it, man destroyed
   it. Is any injury done to Rome, because it is said, "She is falling"?
   No, not to Rome, but to her builder perhaps. Do we then its builder any
   injury, because we say, Rome is falling, which Romulus built? This
   world itself will be burnt with fire, which God built. But neither does
   what man has made fall to ruin, except when God wills it; nor what God
   has made, except when He wills. For if the work of man fall not without
   God's will, how can God's work fall by the will of man? Yet God both
   made the world that was one day to fall for thee; and therefore made He
   thee as one who was one day to die. Man himself, the city's ornament,
   man himself, the city's inhabitant, ruler, governor, comes on this
   condition that he may go, is born on this condition that he may die,
   entered into the world on this condition that he may pass away; "Heaven
   and earth shall pass away:" [2727] what wonder then if some time or
   other there should be an end of a single city? And yet peradventure the
   city's end is not come now; yet some time or other come it will. But
   why does Rome perish amid the sacrifices of Christians? Why was her
   mother Troy burnt amid the sacrifices of Heathens? The gods in whom the
   Romans have placed all their hope, yea the Roman gods in whom the
   Heathen Romans placed their hope, removed from the flames of Troy to
   found Rome. These very gods of Rome were originally the gods of Troy.
   Troy was burnt, and Æneas took the fugitive gods; yea rather himself a
   fugitive he took away these senseless gods. For they could be carried
   by the fugitive; but they could not flee away themselves. And coming
   with these gods into Italy, with these false gods, he founded Rome. It
   is too long to go through the whole story; yet would I briefly mention
   what their own writings contain. An author of theirs well known to all
   speaks thus; "As I have received the account, the Trojans who under the
   guidance of Æneas were wandering about as fugitives without any settled
   abode, originally built and inhabited Rome." [2728] So they had their
   gods with them, they builded Rome in Latium, and there they placed the
   gods to be worshipped, which before were worshipped in Troy. Juno is
   introduced by their poet, incensed against Æneas and the fugitive
   Trojans, saying,

   "A race of wandering slaves abhorred by me,

   With prosperous passage cuts the Tuscan sea,

   To fruitful Italy their course they steer,

   And for their vanquished gods, design new temples

   there." [2729]

   Now when these vanquished gods were carried into Italy, was it as a
   protecting deity, or [2730] as a presage [2731] of their future fall?
   "Love" therefore "the law of God, and nothing shall be an offence to
   you." We pray you, we beseech you, we exhort you; be meek, sympathize
   with the suffering, bear the weak; and on this occasion of the
   concourse of so many strangers, and needy, and suffering people, let
   your hospitality and your good works abound. Let but Christians do what
   Christ enjoineth, and so will the Heathen blaspheme only to their own
   hurt.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2694] Ps. viii. 4.

   [2695] Matt. xviii. 7.

   [2696] Ps. cxix. 165.

   [2697] Rom. ii. 13.

   [2698] Gal. v. 6.

   [2699] Ps. xxxvii. 11.

   [2700] Ps. xciv. 12, 13.

   [2701] Job ii. 9, Sept.

   [2702] Job ii. 10, Sept.

   [2703] 1 Cor. iii. 7.

   [2704] Jas. iv. 6.

   [2705] John i. 10.

   [2706] 2 Cor. v. 19.

   [2707] Matt. xviii. 8, 9.

   [2708] Matt. xvi. 23.

   [2709] Matt. xvi. 17.

   [2710] Matt. iv. 6.

   [2711] Ps. cxvi. 11.

   [2712] Wisd. i. 11.

   [2713] Corpus, dicis tu, premit: dico ego, perimit.

   [2714] Deut. v. 20.

   [2715] Ps. v. 6.

   [2716] Matt. x. 28.

   [2717] Ps. xiv. 2, 3.

   [2718] John i. 12.

   [2719] Ps. lxxxii. 6.

   [2720] By the inundation of the Goths, Serm. lv. (cv. Ben.).

   [2721] Matt. viii. 24.

   [2722] Eph. iii. 17.

   [2723] Oblita.

   [2724] Gal. iii. 16.

   [2725] Ps. ciii. 5.

   [2726] Insulis.

   [2727] Matt. xxiv. 35.

   [2728] Sallust in Catil. 6.

   [2729] Æn. i. 71, 2.

   [2730] De Civit. Dei, lib. i. c. 3. Immo vero victos deos tanquam
   præsides ac defensores colere, quid est aliud quam tenere non numina
   bona sed omina mala?

   [2731] Numen erat, an omen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXII.

   [LXXXII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xviii. 15, "If thy brother sin
   against thee, go, shew him his fault between thee and him alone;" and
   of the words of Solomon, he that winketh with the eyes deceitfully,
   heapeth sorrow upon men; but he that reproveth openly, maketh peace.

   1. Our Lord warns us not to neglect one another's sins, not by
   searching out what to find fault with, but by looking out for what to
   amend. For He said that his eye is sharp to cast out a mote out of his
   brother's eye, who has not a beam in his own eye. Now what this means,
   I will briefly convey to you, Beloved. A mote in the eye is anger; a
   beam in the eye is hatred. When therefore one who has hatred finds
   fault with one who is angry, he wishes to take a mote out of his
   brother's eye, but is hindered by the beam which he carries in his own
   eye. A mote is the beginning of a beam. For a beam in the course of its
   growth, is first a mote. By watering the mote, you bring it to a beam;
   by nourishing anger with evil suspicions, you bring it on to hatred.

   2. Now there is a great difference between the sin of one who is angry,
   and the cruelty of one who holds another in hatred. For even with our
   children are we angry; but who is ever found to hate his children?
   Among the very cattle too, the cow in a sort of weariness will
   sometimes in anger drive away her sucking calf; but anon she embraces
   it with all the affection of a mother. She is in a way disgusted with
   it, when she butts at it; yet when she misses it, she will seek after
   it. Nor do we discipline our children otherwise, than with a degree of
   anger and indignation; yet we should not discipline them at all, but in
   love to them. So far then is every one who is angry from hating; that
   sometimes one would be rather convicted of hating, if he were not
   angry. For suppose a child wishes to play in some river's stream, by
   whose force he would be like to perish; if you see this, and patiently
   suffer it, this would be hating; your patient suffering him, is his
   death. How far better is it to be angry and correct him, than by not
   being angry to suffer him to perish! Above all things then is hatred to
   be avoided, and the beam to be cast out of the eye. Great is the
   difference indeed between one's exceeding due limits in some words
   through anger, which he afterwards wipes off by repenting of it; and
   the keeping an insidious purpose shut up in the heart. Great, lastly,
   the difference between these words of Scripture; "Mine eye is
   disordered because of anger." [2732] Whereas of the other it is said,
   "Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer." [2733] Great is the
   difference between an eye disordered, and clean put out. A mote
   disorders, a beam puts clean out.

   3. In order then that we may be able well to do and to fulfil what we
   have been admonished of to-day, let us first persuade ourselves to
   this, above all things to have no hate. For when there is no beam in
   thine own eye, thou seest rightly whatever may be in thy brother's eye;
   and art uneasy, till thou cast out of thy brother's eye what thou seest
   to hurt it. The light that is in thee, doth not allow thee to neglect
   thy brother's light. Whereas if thou hate, and wouldest correct him,
   how dost thou improve his light, when thou hast lost thine own light?
   For the same Scripture, where it is written, "Whosoever hateth his
   brother is a murderer," hath expressly told us this also. "He that
   hateth his brother is in darkness even until now." [2734] Hatred then
   is darkness. Now it cannot but be, that he who hateth another, should
   first injure himself. For him he endeavours to hurt outwardly, he lays
   himself waste inwardly. Now in proportion as our soul is of more value
   than our body, so much the more ought we to provide for it, that it be
   not hurt. But he that hateth another, doth hurt his own soul. And what
   would he do to him whom he hateth? What would he do? He takes away his
   money, can he take his faith away? he wounds his good fame, can he
   wound his conscience? Whatever injury he does, is but external; now
   observe what his injury to himself is? For he who hateth another is an
   enemy to himself within. But because he is not sensible of what harm he
   is doing to himself, he is violent against another, and that the more
   dangerously, that he is not sensible of the evil he is doing to
   himself; because by this very violence he has lost the power of
   perception. Thou art violent against thine enemy; by this violence of
   thine he is spoiled, and thou art wicked. Great is the difference
   between the two. He hath lost his money, thou thine innocence. Ask
   which hath suffered the heavier loss? He hath lost a thing that was
   sure to perish, and thou art become one who must now perish thyself.

   4. Therefore ought we to rebuke in love; not with any eager desire to
   injure, but with an earnest care to amend. If we be so minded, most
   excellently do we practise that which we have been recommended to-day;
   "If thy brother shall sin against thee, rebuke him between thee and him
   alone." [2735] Why dost thou rebuke him? Because thou art grieved, that
   he should have sinned against thee? God forbid. If from love of thyself
   thou do it, thou doest nothing. If from love to him thou do it, thou
   doest excellently. In fact, observe in these words themselves, for the
   love of whom thou oughtest to do it, whether of thyself or him. "If he
   shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother." Do it for his sake
   then, that thou mayest "gain" him. If by so doing thou "gain" him,
   hadst thou not done it, he would have been lost. How is it then that
   most men disregard these sins, and say, "What great thing have I done?
   I have only sinned against man." Disregard them not. Thou hast sinned
   against man; but wouldest thou know that in sinning against man thou
   art lost. If he, against whom thou hast sinned, have "rebuked thee
   between thee and him alone," and thou hast listened to him, he hath
   "gained" thee. What can "hath gained thee," mean; but that thou hadst
   been lost, if he had not gained thee. For if thou wouldest not have
   been lost, how hath he gained thee? Let no man then disregard it, when
   he sins against a brother. For the Apostle saith in a certain place,
   "But when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak
   conscience, ye sin against Christ;" [2736] for this reason, because we
   have been all made members of Christ. How dost thou not sin against
   Christ, who sinnest against a member of Christ?

   5. Let no one therefore say, "I have not sinned against God, but
   against a brother. I have sinned against a man, it is a trifling sin,
   or no sin at all." It may be, thou sayest it is a trifling sin, because
   it is soon cured. Thou hast sinned against a brother; give him
   satisfaction, and thou art made whole. Thou didst a deadly thing
   quickly, but quickly too hast thou found a remedy. Who of us, my
   Brethren, can hope for the kingdom of heaven, when the Gospel says,
   "Whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
   hell fire?" [2737] Exceeding terror! but behold in the same place the
   remedy: "If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest
   that thy brother hath ought against thee, leave there thy gift before
   the altar." [2738] God is not angry that thou deferrest to lay thy gift
   upon the Altar. It is thee that God seeketh more than thy gift. For if
   thou come with a gift to thy God, bearing an evil mind against thy
   brother, He will answer thee, "Thou art lost, what hast thou brought
   Me? Thou bringest thy gift, and thou art thyself no proper gift for
   God. Christ seeketh him whom He hath redeemed with His Blood, more than
   what thou hast found in thy barn." So then, "Leave there thy gift
   before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother,
   and so thou shalt come and offer thy gift." Lo that "danger of hell
   fire," how quickly dissolved it is! When thou wast not yet reconciled,
   thou wast "in danger of hell fire;" once reconciled, thou offerest thy
   gift before the altar in all security.

   6. But men are easy and ready enough to inflict injuries, and hard to
   seek for reconciliation. Ask pardon, says one, of him whom thou hast
   offended, of him whom thou hast injured. He answers, "I will not so
   humble myself." But now if thou despise thy brother, at least give ear
   to thy God. "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted." [2739] Wilt
   thou refuse to humble thyself, who hast already fallen? Great is the
   difference between one who humbleth himself, and one who lieth on the
   ground. Already dost thou lie on the ground, and wilt thou then not
   humble thyself? Thou mightest well say, I will not descend; if thou
   hadst first been unwilling to fall.

   7. This then ought one to do who hath done an injury. And he who hath
   suffered one, what ought he to do? What we have heard to-day, "If thy
   brother shall sin against thee, rebuke him between thee and him alone."
   [2740] If thou shall neglect this, thou art worse than he. He hath done
   an injury, and by doing an injury, hath stricken himself with a
   grievous wound; wilt thou disregard thy brother's wound? Wilt thou see
   him perishing, or already lost, and disregard his case? Thou art worse
   in keeping silence, than he in his reviling. Therefore when any one
   sins against us, let us take great care, not for ourselves, for it is a
   glorious thing to forget injuries; only forget thine own injury, not
   thy brother's wound. Therefore "rebuke him between thee and him alone,"
   intent upon his amendment, but sparing his shame. For it may be that
   through shame-facedness he will begin to defend his sin, and so thou
   wilt make him whom thou desirest to amend, still worse. "Rebuke him"
   therefore "between him and thee alone. If he shall hear thee, thou hast
   gained thy brother;" because he would have been lost, hadst thou not
   done it. But "if he will not hear thee," that is, if he will defend his
   sin as if it were a just action, "take with thee one or two more, that
   in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established;
   and if he will not hear them, refer it to the Church; but if he will
   not hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a
   publican." [2741] Reckon him no more amongst the number of thy
   brethren. But yet neither is his salvation on that account to be
   neglected. For the very heathen, that is, the Gentiles and Pagans, we
   do not reckon among the number of brethren; but yet are we ever seeking
   their salvation. This then have we heard the Lord so advising, and with
   such great carefulness enjoining, that He even added this immediately,
   "Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be
   bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be
   loosed in heaven." [2742] Thou hast begun to hold thy brother for a
   publican; "thou bindest him on earth;" but see that thou bind him
   justly. For unjust bonds justice doth burst asunder. But when thou hast
   corrected, and been "reconciled to thy brother," thou hast "loosed him
   on earth." And when "thou shalt have loosed him on earth, he shall be
   loosed in heaven also." Thus thou doest a great thing, not for thyself,
   but for him; for a great injury had he done, not to thee, but to
   himself.

   8. But since this is so, what is that which Solomon says, and which we
   heard first to-day out of another lesson, "He that winketh with the
   eyes deceitfully, heapeth sorrow upon men; but he that reproveth
   openly, maketh peace"? [2743] If then "he that reproveth openly, maketh
   peace;" how "rebuke him between him and thee alone"? We must fear, lest
   the divine precepts should be contrary to one another. But no: let us
   understand that there is the most perfect agreement in them, let us not
   follow the conceits of certain vain ones, [2744] who in their error
   think that the two Testaments in the Old and New Books are contrary to
   each other; that so we should think that there is any contradiction
   here, because one is in the book of Solomon, and the other in the
   Gospel. For if any one unskilful in, and a reviler of the divine
   Scriptures, were to say, "See where the two Testaments contradict each
   other. The Lord saith, Rebuke him between him and thee alone.' Solomon
   saith, He that reproveth openly maketh peace.'" Doth not the Lord then
   know what He hath commanded? Solomon would have the sinners' hard
   forehead bruised: Christ spareth his shame who blushes for his sins.
   For in the one place it is written, "He that reproveth openly maketh
   peace;" but in the other, "Rebuke him between him and thee alone;" not
   "openly," but apart and secretly. But wouldest thou know, whosoever
   thou art that thinkest such things, that the two Testaments are not
   opposed to each other, because the first of these passages is found in
   the book of Solomon, and the other in the Gospel? Hear the Apostle. And
   surely the Apostle is a Minister of the New Testament. Hear the Apostle
   Paul then, charging Timothy, and saying, "Them that sin rebuke before
   all, that others also may fear." [2745] So then not the book of
   Solomon, but an Epistle of Paul the Apostle seems to be at issue with
   the Gospel. Let us then without any [2746] prejudice to his honour lay
   aside Solomon for a while; let us hear the Lord Christ and His servant
   Paul. What sayest Thou, O Lord? "If thy brother sin against thee,
   rebuke him between him and thee alone." What sayest thou, O Apostle?
   "Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear." What are
   we about? Are we listening to this controversy as judges? That be far
   from us. Yea, rather as those whose place is under the Judge, let us
   knock, that we may obtain, that it be opened to us; let us fly beneath
   the wings of our Lord God. For He did not speak in contradiction to His
   Apostle, seeing that He Himself spoke "in" him also, as he says, "Would
   ye receive a proof of Christ, who speaketh in me?" [2747] Christ in the
   Gospel, Christ in the Apostle: Christ therefore spake both; one by His
   own Mouth, the other by the mouth of His herald. For when the herald
   pronounces anything from the tribunal, it is not written in the
   records, "the herald said it;" but he is written as having said it, who
   commanded the herald what to say.

   9. Let us then so give ear to these two precepts, Brethren, as that we
   may understand them, and let us settle ourselves in peace between them
   both. Let us but be in agreement with our own heart, and Holy Scripture
   will in no part disagree with itself. It is entirely true, both
   precepts are true; but we must make a distinction, that sometimes the
   one, sometimes the other must be done; that sometimes a brother must be
   "reproved between him and thee alone," sometimes a brother "must be
   reproved before all, that others also may fear." If we do sometimes the
   one, and sometimes the other, we shall hold fast the harmony of the
   Scriptures, and shall not err in fulfilling and obeying them. But a man
   will say to me, "When am I to do this one, and when the other? lest I
   reprove between me and him alone,' when I ought to reprove before all;'
   or reprove before all,' when I ought to reprove in secret."

   10. You will soon see, Beloved, what we ought to do, and when; only I
   would we may not be slow to practise it. Attend and see: "If thy
   brother sin against thee, rebuke him between him and thee alone." Why?
   Because it is against thee that he hath sinned. What is that, "hath
   sinned against thee"? Thou knowest that he hath sinned. For because it
   was secret when he sinned against thee, seek for secresy, when thou
   dost correct his sin. For if thou only know that he hath sinned against
   thee, and thou wouldest "rebuke him before all," thou art not a
   reprover, but a betrayer. Consider how that "just man" Joseph spared
   his wife with such exceeding kindness, in so great a crime as he had
   suspected her of, before he knew by whom she had conceived; because he
   perceived that she was with child, and he knew that he had not come in
   unto her. There remained then an unavoidable [2748] suspicion of
   adultery, and yet because he only had perceived, he only knew it, what
   does the Gospel say of him? "Then Joseph being a just man, and not
   willing to make her a public example." [2749] The husband's grief
   sought no revenge; he wished to profit, not to punish the sinner. "And
   not willing to make her a public example, he was minded to put her away
   privily." But while he thought on these things, "behold, the Angel of
   the Lord appeared unto him," [2750] in sleep; and told him how it was,
   that she had not defiled her husband's bed, but that she had conceived
   of the Holy Ghost the Lord of them both. Thy brother then hath sinned
   against thee; if thou alone know it, then hath he really sinned against
   thee alone. For if in the hearing of many he hath done thee an injury,
   he hath sinned against them also whom he hath made witnesses of his
   iniquity. For I tell you, my dearly beloved Brethren, what you can
   yourselves recognise in your own case. When any one does my brother an
   injury in my hearing, God forbid that I should think that injury
   unconnected with myself. Certainly he has done it to me also; yea to me
   the rather, to whom he thought what he did was pleasing. Therefore
   those sins are to be reproved before all, which are committed before
   all; they are to be reproved with more secresy, which are committed
   more secretly. Distinguish times, and Scripture is in harmony with
   itself.

   11. So let us act; and so must we act not only when the sin is
   committed against ourselves, but when the sin is so committed by any
   one as that it is unknown by the other. In secret ought we to rebuke,
   in secret to reprove him; lest if we would reprove him publicly, we
   should betray the man. We wish to rebuke and reform him; but what if
   his enemy is looking out to hear something that he may punish? For
   example, a Bishop knows of some one who has killed another, and no one
   else knows of him. I wish to reprove him publicly; but thou art seeking
   to prosecute him. [2751] Decidedly then I will neither betray him, nor
   neglect him; I will reprove him in secret; I will set the judgment of
   God before his eyes; I will alarm his bloodstained conscience; I will
   persuade him to repentance. With this charity ought we to be endued.
   And hence men sometimes find fault with us, as if we do not reprove; or
   they think that we know what we do not know, or that we hush up what we
   know. And it may be that what thou knowest, I know also but I will not
   reprove in thy presence I because I wish to cure, not to act informer.
   There are men who commit adultery in their own houses, they sin in
   secret, sometimes they are discovered to us by their own wives,
   generally through jealousy, sometimes as seeking their husband's
   salvation; in such cases we do not betray them openly, but reprove them
   in secret. Where the evil has happened, there let the evil die. Yet do
   we not neglect that wound; above all things showing the man who is in
   such a sinful state, and bears such a wounded conscience, that that is
   a deadly wound which they who suffer from, sometimes by an
   unaccountable perverseness despise; and seek out testimonies in their
   favour, I know not whence, null certainly and void, saying, "God careth
   not for sins of the flesh." [2752] Where is that then which we have
   heard to-day, "Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge"? [2753] Lo!
   whosoever thou art that labourest under such a disease attend. Hear
   what God saith; not what thine own mind, in indulgence to thine own
   sins, may say, or what thy friend, thine enemy rather and his own too,
   bound in the same bond of iniquity with thee may say. Hear then what
   the Apostle saith; "Marriage is honourable in all, and the bed
   undefiled. But whoremongers and adulterers God will judge."

   12. Come then, Brother, be reformed. Thou art afraid lest thine enemy
   should prosecute thee; and art thou not afraid lest God should judge
   thee? Where is thy faith? Fear whilst there is the time for fear. Far
   off indeed is the day of judgment; but every man's last day cannot be
   far off; for life is short. And since this shortness is ever uncertain,
   thou knowest not when thy last day may be. Reform thyself today,
   because of to-morrow. Let the reproof in secret be of service to thee
   now. For I am speaking openly, yet do I reprove in secret. I knock at
   the ears of all; but I accost [2754] the consciences of some. If I were
   to say, "Thou adulterer, reform thyself;" perhaps in the first place I
   might say what I had no knowledge of; perhaps suspect on a rash hearsay
   report. I do not then say, "Thou adulterer, reform thyself;" but
   "whosoever thou art among this people who art an adulterer, reform
   thyself." So the reproof is public; the reformation secret. This I
   know, that whoso feareth, will reform himself.

   13. Let no one say in his heart, "God careth not for sins of the
   flesh." "Know ye not," saith the Apostle, "that ye are the temple of
   God, and the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the
   temple of God, him will God destroy." [2755] "Let no man deceive
   himself." But perhaps a man will say, "My soul is the temple of God,
   not my body," and will add this testimony also, "All flesh is as grass,
   and all the glory of man as the flower of grass." [2756] Unhappy
   interpretation! conceit meet for punishment! The flesh is called grass,
   because it dies; but take thou heed that that which dies for a time,
   rise not again with guilt. Wouldest thou ascertain a plain judgment on
   this point also? "Know ye not," says the same Apostle, "that your body
   is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God?"
   [2757] Do not then any longer disregard sins of the body; seeing that
   your "bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which
   ye have of God." If thou didst disregard a sin of the body, wilt thou
   disregard a sin which thou committest against a temple? Thy very body
   is a temple of the Spirit of God within thee. Now take heed what thou
   doest with the temple of God. If thou wert to choose to commit adultery
   in the Church within these walls, what wickedness could be greater? But
   now thou art thyself the temple of God. In thy going out, in thy coming
   in, as thou abidest in thy house, as thou risest up, in all thou art a
   temple. Take heed then what thou doest, take heed that thou offend not
   the Indweller of the temple, lest He forsake thee, and thou fall into
   ruins. "Know ye not," he says, "that your bodies" (and this the Apostle
   spake touching fornication, that they might not think lightly of sins
   of the body) "are the temples of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which
   ye have of God, and ye are not your own?" For "ye have been bought with
   a great [2758] price." If thou think so lightly of thine own body, have
   some consideration for thy price.

   14. I know, and as I do every one knows, who has used a little more
   than ordinary consideration, that no man who has any fear of God omits
   to reform himself in obedience to His words, but he who thinks that he
   has longer time to live. This it is which kills so many, while they are
   saying, "To-morrow, To-morrow;" and suddenly the door is shut. He
   remains outside with the raven's croak, [2759] because he had not the
   moaning of the dove. "To-morrow, To-morrow;" is the raven's croak. Moan
   plaintively as the dove, and beat thy breast; but whilst thou art
   inflicting blows on thy breast, be the better for the beating; lest
   thou seem not to beat thy conscience, but rather with blows to harden
   it, and make an evil conscience more unyielding instead of better. Moan
   with no fruitless moaning. For it may be thou art saying to thyself,
   "God hath promised me forgiveness, whenever I reform myself I am
   secure; I read the divine Scripture, "In the day that the wicked man
   turneth away from his wickedness, and doeth that which is lawful and
   right, I will forget all his iniquities." [2760] I am secure then,
   whenever I reform myself, God will give me pardon for my evil deeds."
   What can I say to this? Shall I lift up my voice against God? Shall I
   say to God, Do not give him pardon? Shall I say, This is not written,
   God hath not promised this? If I should say ought of this, I should say
   falsely. Thou speakest well and truly; God hath promised pardon on thy
   amendment, I cannot deny it; but tell me, I pray thee; see, I consent,
   I grant, I acknowledge that God hath promised thee pardon, but who hath
   promised thee a to-morrow? Where thou dost read to me that thou shalt
   receive pardon, if thou reform thyself; there read to me how long thou
   hast to live. Thou dost confess, "I cannot read it there." Thou knowest
   not then how long thou hast to live. Reform thyself, and so be always
   ready. Be not afraid of the last day, as a thief, who will break up thy
   house as thou sleepest; but awake and reform thyself to-day. Why dost
   thou put it off till to-morrow? If thy life is to be a long one, let it
   be both long and good. No one puts off a good dinner, because it is to
   be a long one, and dost thou wish to have a long evil life? Surely if
   it is to be long, it will be all the better if it be good; if it is to
   be short, it is well that its good be as long as possible. [2761] But
   men neglect their life to such a degree, as that they are unwilling to
   have anything bad except it. You buy a farm, and you look out for a
   good one; you wish to marry a wife, you choose a good one; you wish for
   the birth of children, and you long for good ones; you bargain for
   shoes, and you do not wish for bad ones; and yet a bad life you [2762]
   do love. How hath thy life offended thee, that thou art willing to have
   it only bad; that amid all thy good things thou shouldest thyself alone
   be evil?

   15. So then, my Brethren, if I should wish to reprove any of you
   individually in secret, perhaps he would listen to me. I reprove many
   of you now in public; all praise me; may some give attentive heed to
   me! I have no love for him who praises me with his voice, and with his
   heart despises me. For when thou dost praise, and not reform thyself,
   thou art a witness against thyself. If thou art evil, and thou art
   pleased with what I say, be displeased with thyself; because if thou
   art displeased with thyself as being evil, when thou dost reform, thou
   wilt be well pleased with thyself, which if I mistake not I said the
   day before yesterday. In all my words I set a mirror before you. Nor
   are they my words, but I speak at the bidding of the Lord, by whose
   terrors I refrain from keeping silence. For who would not rather choose
   to keep silence, and not to give account for you? But now I have
   undertaken the burden, and I cannot, and I ought not to shake it off my
   shoulders. When the Epistle to the Hebrews was being read, my Brethren,
   ye heard, "Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit
   yourselves; for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
   account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is
   unprofitable for you." [2763] When do we it with joy? When we see man
   making progress in the words of God. When does the labourer in the
   field work with joy? When he looks at the tree, and sees the fruit;
   when he looks at the crop, and sees the prospect of abundance of corn
   in the floor; when he sees that he has not laboured in vain, has not
   bowed his back, and bruised his hands, and endured the cold and heat in
   vain. This is what he says, "That they may do it with joy, and not with
   grief; for that is unprofitable for you." Did he say, "unprofitable for
   them"? No. He said, "unprofitable for you." For when those who are set
   over you are saddened at your evil deeds, it is profitable for them;
   their very sadness is profitable for them; but it is unprofitable for
   you. But we do not wish that anything should be profitable for us,
   which for you is unprofitable. Let us then, Brethren, do good together
   in the Lord's field; that at the reward we may rejoice together.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2732] Ps. vi. 8, Sept. (7, English version).

   [2733] 1 John iii. 15.

   [2734] 1 John ii. 9.

   [2735] Matt. xviii. 15.

   [2736] 1 Cor. viii. 12.

   [2737] Matt. v. 22.

   [2738] Matt. v. 23, 24.

   [2739] Luke xiv. 11.

   [2740] Matt. xviii. 15.

   [2741] Matt. xviii. 16, 17.

   [2742] Matt. xviii. 18.

   [2743] Prov. x. 10, Sept.

   [2744] The Manichees.

   [2745] 1 Tim. v. 20.

   [2746] Injuria.

   [2747] 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

   [2748] Certa.

   [2749] Matt. i. 19.

   [2750] Matt. i. 20.

   [2751] Inscribere.

   [2752] Vide Serm. ccxxiv. (2).

   [2753] Heb. xiii. 4.

   [2754] Convenio.

   [2755] 1 Cor. iii. 16, 17.

   [2756] 1 Pet. i. 24.

   [2757] 1 Cor. vi. 19.

   [2758] Vulgate.

   [2759] Serm. ccxxiii. 4. Enarr. in Ps. cii. 16.

   [2760] Ezek. xviii. 21, 22.

   [2761] Bene factum est, ut bona produceretur.

   [2762] Serm. xxii. (lxxii. Ben.) 5 (iv.).

   [2763] Heb. xiii. 17.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXIII.

   [LXXXIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xvii. 21, "How oft shall my brother
   sin against me," etc.

   1. Yesterday the holy Gospel warned us not to neglect the sins of our
   brethren: "But if thy brother shall sin against thee, rebuke him
   between him and thee alone. If he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy
   brother. But if he shall refuse to hear thee, take with thee two or
   three more; that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may
   be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them too, tell it to
   the Church. But if he shall neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto
   thee as an heathen man and a publican." [2764] To-day also the section
   which follows, and which we heard when it was read, relates to the same
   subject. For when the Lord Jesus had said this to Peter, he went on to
   ask his Master, how often he should forgive a brother who had sinned
   against him; and he enquired whether seven times would be enough. "The
   Lord answered him, Not only seven times, but seventy times seven."
   [2765] Then he added a parable very full of terror: That the "kingdom
   of heaven is like unto an householder, which took account with his
   servants; among whom he found one that owed ten thousand talents. And
   when he commanded all that he had, and all his family, and himself to
   be sold, and the debt to be paid, he fell down at his lord's feet,"
   [2766] and prayed for delay, and obtained [2767] entire remission. For
   as we have heard, "His lord was moved with compassion, and forgave him
   all the debt." Then that man free from his debt, but a bondslave of
   iniquity, after he had gone out from the presence of his lord, found in
   his turn a debtor of his own, who owed him, not ten thousand talents,
   the sum which had been remitted to him, but a hundred denarii; and "he
   began to drag him by the throat, and say, Pay me that thou owest."
   [2768] Then he besought his fellow-servant as he had done his lord; but
   he did not find his fellow-servant such a man as the other had found
   his lord. He not only would not forgive him the debt; but he did not
   even grant him a delay. He hurried him along with great violence [2769]
   to make him pay, he who had been but just now set free from his debt to
   his lord. His fellow-servants were displeased; and "went and told their
   lord what was done;" and the lord summoned his servant to his presence,
   and said to him, "O thou wicked servant, when thou didst owe me so
   great a debt, in pity to thee I forgave thee all. Shouldest not thou
   also have had compassion on thy fellow-servant, even as I had pity on
   thee?" [2770] And he commanded that all which he had forgiven him
   should be paid.

   2. It is then for our instruction that He put forth this parable, and
   by this warning He would save us from perishing. "So," said He, "shall
   My heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not
   every one his brother their trespasses." [2771] Lo, Brethren, the thing
   is plain, useful is the admonition, and a wholesome obedience is by all
   means due, that what hath been bidden may be fulfilled. For every man
   is at once God's debtor, and hath also some brother a debtor to
   himself. For who is there who is not God's debtor, but he in whom there
   can be found no sin? And who is there who hath not a brother his
   debtor, but he against whom no one hath sinned? Think you that any one
   among mankind can be found, who is not himself bounden to his brother
   by some sin? So then every man is a debtor, yet having himself his own
   debtors too. The righteous God therefore appointeth a rule for thee
   toward thy debtor, which He also will observe with His. For two works
   of mercy are there, which deliver us, which the Lord hath Himself
   briefly laid down in the Gospel: "Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven:
   give, and it shall be given unto you." [2772] "Forgive, and ye shall be
   forgiven," relates to pardoning. "Give, and it shall be given unto
   you," relates to doing kindnesses. As to what He saith of pardoning,
   thou both wishest thy sin to be pardoned thee, and thou hast another
   whom thou mayest pardon. Again, as to the doing kindnesses; a beggar
   asks of thee, and thou art God's beggar. For we are all when we pray
   God's beggars; we stand, yea rather we fall prostrate before the door
   of the Great Householder, we groan in supplication wishing to receive
   something; and this something is God Himself. What does the beggar ask
   of thee? Bread. And what dost thou ask of God, but Christ, who saith,
   "I am the living Bread which came down from heaven"? [2773] Would you
   be forgiven? Forgive. "Forgive, and it shall be forgiven you." Would
   you receive? "Give, and it shall be given unto you."

   3. But now hear what in so plain a precept I may cause a difficulty. In
   this question of forgiveness when pardon is asked, and it is due from
   him who should grant it, it may be a difficulty to us as it was to
   Peter. "How often ought I to forgive? Is up to seven times sufficient?"
   "It is not sufficient," saith the Lord, "I say not unto thee, Until
   seven times; but, Until seventy times seven." [2774] Now reckon up how
   often thy brother hath sinned against thee. If thou canst reach the
   seventy-eighth fault, so as to get beyond the seventy times seven, then
   set about revenge. Is this then what He really means, and is it really
   so, that if he shall sin "seventy times seven," thou shouldest forgive
   him; but if he shall sin seventy times and eight, it should then be
   lawful for thee not to forgive? Nay I am bold to say, that if he should
   even sin seventy-eight times, thou must forgive. Yea, as I have said,
   if he shall sin seventy-eight times, forgive. And if he sin a hundred
   times, forgive. And why need I say, so and so often? In one word,
   [2775] as often as he shall sin, forgive him. Have I then taken upon me
   to overpass the measure of my Lord? He fixed the limit of forgiveness
   in the number seventy-seven; shall I presume to overleap this limit? It
   is not so, I have not presumed to go at all beyond. I have heard the
   Lord Himself speaking in His Apostle where there is no measure or
   number fixed. For He says, "Forgiving one another, if any man have a
   quarrel against any, as God in Christ hath forgiven you." [2776] Here
   you have the rule. If Christ have forgiven thee thy sins "seventy times
   and seven" only, if He have pardoned up to this point, and refused to
   pardon beyond it; then do thou also fix this limit, and be loth to
   forgive beyond it. But if Christ hath found thousands of sins upon
   sins, and hath yet forgiven all; withdraw not then thy mercy, but ask
   the forgiveness of that large number. For it was not without a meaning
   that the Lord said "seventy times seven;" forasmuch as there is no
   trespass whatever which thou oughtest not to forgive. See this servant
   in the parable, who being a debtor was found to have a debtor, owed ten
   thousand talents. And I suppose that ten thousand talents are at least
   ten thousand sins. For I will not say how but one talent will include
   all sins. But how much did the other servant owe him? He owed a hundred
   denarii. Now is not this more than "seventy and seven"? And yet the
   Lord was wroth, because he did not forgive him. For not only is a
   hundred more than "seventy-seven;" but a hundred denarii, perhaps are a
   thousand" asses." But what was this to ten thousand talents?

   4. And so let us be ready to forgive all the trespasses which are
   committed against us, if we desire to be forgiven. For if we consider
   our sins, and reckon up what we do in deed, what by the eye, what by
   the ear, what by thought, what by numberless movements; I know not
   whether we so much as sleep without a talent. And therefore do we daily
   beg, daily knock at the ears of God by prayer, daily prostrate
   ourselves and say, "Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors."
   [2777] What debts of thine? All, or a certain part? Thou wilt answer,
   All. So then do thou with thy debtor. This then is the rule thou layest
   down, this the condition thou speakest of; this the covenant and
   agreement thou dost mention when thou prayest, saying, "Forgive us, as
   we forgive our debtors."

   5. What then, Brethren, is the meaning of "seventy times seven"? Hear,
   for it is a great mystery, a wonderful sacrament. When the Lord was
   baptized, the Evangelist St. Luke has in that place commemorated His
   generations in the regular order, series, and line in which they had
   come down to that generation in which Christ was born. Matthew begins
   at Abraham, [2778] and comes down to Joseph in a descending order; but
   Luke begins to reckon in an ascending order. Why does the one reckon in
   a descending, and the other in an ascending order? Because Matthew set
   forth the generation of Christ by which He came down to us; and so he
   began to reckon when Christ was born in a descending order. [2779]
   Whereas, because Luke begins to reckon when Christ was baptized; in
   this is the beginning of ascension, he begins to reckon in an ascending
   order, and in his reckoning he has completed seventy-seven generations.
   [2780] With whom did he begin his reckoning? Observe with whom? He
   began to reckon from Christ up to Adam himself, who was the first
   sinner, and who begat us with the bond of sin. He reckoned up to Adam,
   and so there are reckoned seventy-seven generations; that is, from
   Christ up to Adam and from Adam up to Christ are the aforesaid
   seventy-seven generations. So then if no generation was omitted, there
   is no exemption of any trespass which ought not to be forgiven. For
   therefore did he reckon up his seventy-seven generations, which number
   the Lord mentioned as to the forgiveness of sins; since he begins to
   reckon from the baptism, wherein all sins are remitted.

   6. And, Brethren, observe in this a yet greater mystery. [2781] In the
   number seventy-seven is a mystery of the remission of sins. So many are
   the generations found to be from Christ to Adam. Now then, ask with
   somewhat more careful diligence for the secret meaning of this number,
   and enquire into its hidden meaning; with more careful diligence knock,
   that it may be opened unto thee. Righteousness consists in the
   observance of the Law of God: true. For the Law is set forth in ten
   precepts. Therefore it was that the servant in the parable "owed ten
   thousand talents." This is that memorable Decalogue written by the
   finger of God, and delivered to the people by Moses, the servant of
   God. He "owed" then "ten thousand talents;" which signifies all sins,
   with reference to the number of the Law. And the other "owed a hundred
   denarii;" derived equally from the same number. For a hundred times a
   hundred make ten thousand; and ten times ten make a hundred. And the
   one "owed ten thousand talents," and the other ten times ten denarii.
   For there was no departure from the number [2782] of the law, and in
   both numbers you will find every kind of sin included. Both are
   debtors, and both implore and beg for pardon; but the wicked,
   ungrateful servant would not repay what he had received, would not
   grant the mercy which had been undeservedly accorded to him.

   7. Consider then, Brethren; every man begins from Baptism; he goes out
   free, the "ten thousand talents" are forgiven him; and when he goes
   out, he will soon find some fellow-servant his debtor. Let him note
   then, what sin itself is; [2783] for the number eleven is the
   transgression of the law. For the law is ten, sin eleven. For the law
   is denoted by ten, sin by eleven. Why is sin denoted by eleven? Because
   to get to eleven, there is the transgression of the ten. [2784] But the
   due limit is fixed in the law; and the transgression of it is sin. Now
   when you have passed beyond the ten, you come to eleven. This high
   mystery was figured out when the tabernacle was commanded to be built.
   There are many things mentioned there in number, which are a great
   mystery. [2785] Among the rest, curtains of haircloth were ordered to
   be made not ten, but eleven; [2786] because by haircloth is signified
   the confession of sins. Now what do you require more? Would you know
   how that all sins are contained in this number "seventy-seven"? Seven
   then is usually put for a whole; because in seven days the revolution
   of time is completed, and when the seventh is ended, it returns to the
   first again, that the same revolution may be continued. In such
   revolutions whole ages pass away: yet there is no departure from the
   number seven. For He spoke of all sins, when He said "seventy times
   seven;" for multiply that eleven seven times, and it makes
   seventy-seven. Therefore would He have all sins forgiven, for He marked
   them out by the number" seventy-seven." Let no one then retain against
   himself by refusing to forgive, lest it be retained against him, when
   he prayeth. For God saith, "Forgive, and thou shalt be forgiven." For I
   have forgiven thee first; do thou at least forgive after that. For if
   thou wilt not forgive, I will call thee back, and put upon thee again
   all that I had remitted to thee. For the Truth doth not speak falsely;
   Christ neither deceiveth, nor is deceived, and He hath said at the
   close of the parable, "So likewise shall your Father which is in heaven
   do unto you." [2787] Thou findest a Father, imitate thy Father. For if
   thou wilt not imitate Him, thou art devising [2788] to be disinherited.
   "So likewise" then "shall My heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye
   from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses."
   Say not with the tongue, "I forgive," and put off to forgive in the
   heart; for by His threat of vengeance God showeth thee thy punishment.
   God knoweth where thou speakest. Man can hear thy voice; God looketh
   into thy conscience. If thou sayest, I forgive; forgive. Better is it
   that thou shouldest be violent in words, and forgive in the heart, than
   in words be soft, and in the heart relentless.

   8. Now then unruly boys will beg, and take it [2789] hard to be beat
   taking exception against [2790] us when we wish to chastise them after
   this fashion. "I have sinned, but forgive me." Well, I have forgiven,
   and he sins again. "Forgive me," he cries, and I have forgiven him. He
   sins a third time. "Forgive me," he cries, and a third time I have
   forgiven him. Now then the fourth time let him be beat. And he will
   say, "What! have I tired you out to seventy-seven times?" Now if by
   such exceptions the severity of discipline sleep, upon the suppression
   of discipline wickedness will rage with impunity. What then is to be
   done? Let us reprove with words, and if need be with scourges; but let
   us withal forgive the sin, and cast away the remembrance of it from the
   heart. For therefore did the Lord add, "from your hearts," that though
   through affection discipline be exercised, gentleness might not depart
   out of the heart. For what is so kind and gentle as the surgeon with
   his knife? He that is to be cut cries, yet cut he is; he that is to be
   cauterized cries, but cauterized he is. This is not cruelty; on no
   account let that surgeon's treatment be called cruelty. Cruel he is
   against the wounded part that the patient may be cured; for if the
   wound be softly dealt with, the man is lost. Thus then would I advise,
   my Brethren, that we love our brethren, howsoever they may have sinned
   against us; that we let not affection toward them depart out of our
   hearts, and that when need is, we exercise discipline toward them; lest
   by the relaxation of discipline, wickedness increase, and we begin to
   be accused on God's behalf, for it has been read to us, "Them that sin
   rebuke before all, that others also may fear." [2791] Certainly, if
   one, as is the only true way, distinguishes the times, and so solves
   the question, all is true. If the sin be in secret, rebuke it in
   secret. If the sin be public and open, rebuke it publicly that the
   sinner may be reformed; and "that others also may fear."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2764] Matt. xviii. 15-17.

   [2765] Matt. xviii. 22.

   [2766] Matt. xviii. 23-26.

   [2767] Meruit.

   [2768] Matt. xviii. 28.

   [2769] Contortum.

   [2770] Matt. xviii. 31-33.

   [2771] Matt. xviii. 35.

   [2772] Luke vi. 37, 38.

   [2773] John vi. 51.

   [2774] Matt. xviii. 21, 22.

   [2775] Vid. Serm. lxiv. (cxiv. Ben.) 1.

   [2776] Col. iii. 13; Eph. iv. 32.

   [2777] Matt. vi. 12.

   [2778] Matt. i. 1.

   [2779] Vid. Serm. i. (li. Ben.) 31-5 (xxi.-iv.).

   [2780] Luke iii. 23, etc.

   [2781] Sacramentum.

   [2782] Legitimo numero.

   [2783] Observet ergo ipsum peccatum.

   [2784] Vid. Serm. i. (li. Ben.) 34 (xxiii.).

   [2785] In magno sacramento.

   [2786] Exod. xxvi. 7. Cilicina; trichinas, Sept.

   [2787] Matt. xviii. 35.

   [2788] Disponis.

   [2789] Nolunt.

   [2790] Præscribunt.

   [2791] 1 Tim. v. 20.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXIV.

   [LXXXIV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xix. 17, "If thou wouldest enter into
   life, keep the commandments."

   1. The Lord said to a certain young man, "If thou wilt enter into life,
   keep the commandments." [2792] He did not say, "If thou wilt enter into
   life eternal," but "If thou wilt enter into life;" laying down that as
   life, which is to be life eternal. Let us first then set forth the
   value of the love of this life. For even this present life, under
   whatever circumstances, is loved; and men fear and dread to end it of
   whatever kind it be; however full of trouble and misery. Hence may we
   see, hence consider, how the life eternal should be loved; when this
   life so miserable, and which must sometime come to an end, is loved so
   much. Consider, Brethren, how greatly should that life be loved, where
   thou wilt never end life. Thou dost love, it seems, this present life,
   where thou dost labour so much, hastest to and fro, art busy, sufferest
   fatigue; yea scarcely to be enumerated are the necessities of this
   miserable life; sowing, ploughing, clearing the ground, sailing,
   grinding, cooking, weaving; and after all these things thou hast to end
   thy life. See the evils thou dost suffer in this miserable life, which
   thou lovest; and dost thou think that thou shalt always live, and never
   die? Temples, stones, marbles, joined so strongly together with iron
   and lead, fall into ruin for all their strength; and does a man suppose
   that he shall never die? Learn then, Brethren, to seek for eternal
   life, where you will not endure all this, but will reign with God for
   ever. "For he who wisheth life," as the Prophet says, "loveth to see
   good days." [2793] For in evil days death is rather wished for than
   life. Do we not hear and see men when they are involved in some
   tribulations and distresses, in law-suits or sicknesses and they see
   that they are in travail, do we not hear them saying nothing else but,
   "O God, send me death, hasten my days"? Yet when sickness comes, they
   run about, and physicians are fetched, and money and rewards are
   promised. Death himself says to thee, "Lo, here I am, whom but a little
   while ago thou wert asking of the Lord, why wouldest thou fly from me
   now? I have found thee to be a self-deceiver, and a lover of this
   miserable life."

   2. But as concerning these days which we are passing now, the Apostle
   says, "Redeeming the time, because the days are evil." [2794] Are not
   these days indeed evil which we spend in this corruptible flesh, in or
   under so heavy a load of the corruptible body, amid so great
   temptations, amid so great difficulties, where there is but false
   pleasure, no security of joy, a tormenting fear, a greedy covetousness,
   a withering sadness? Lo, what evil days! yet no one is willing to end
   these same evil days, and hence men earnestly pray God that they may
   live long. Yet what is it to live long, but to be long tormented? What
   is it to live long, but to add evil days to evil days? When boys are
   growing up, it is as if days are being added to them; whereas they do
   not know that they are being diminished; and their very reckoning is
   false. For as we grow in up, the number of our days rather diminishes
   than increases. Appoint for any man at his birth, for instance, eighty
   years; every day he lives, he diminishes somewhat of that sum. Yet
   silly men rejoice at the oft-recurring birthdays, both of themselves
   and their children. O sensible man! If the wine in thy bottle is
   diminished, thou art sad; days art thou losing, and art thou glad?
   These days then are evil; and so much the more evil, in that they are
   loved. This world is so alluring, that no one is willing to finish a
   life of sorrow. For the true, the blessed life is this, when we shall
   rise again, and reign with Christ. For the ungodly too shall rise again
   but to go into the fire. Life then is there again, but that which is
   blessed. And blessed life there can be none but that which is eternal,
   where are "good days;" and those not many days, but one day. They are
   called "days" after the custom of this life. That day knows no rising,
   it knows no setting. To that day there succeeds no to-morrow; because
   no yesterday precedes it. This day, or these days, and this life, this
   true life, have we in promise. It is then the reward of a certain work.
   So if we love the reward, let us not fail in the work; and so shall we
   reign with Christ for ever.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2792] Matt. xix. 17.

   [2793] Ps. xxxiv. 12, Vulgate.

   [2794] Eph. v. 16.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXV.

   [LXXXV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xix. 17, "If thou wouldest enter into
   life, keep the commandments."

   1. The Gospel lesson which has now sounded in our ears, Brethren,
   requires rather an attentive hearer and a doer, than an expositor. What
   is more clear than this light, "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the
   commandments"? [2795] What then have I to say but, "If thou wilt enter
   into life, keep the commandments"? Who is there that does not wish for
   life? and yet who is there that does wish to keep the commandments? If
   thou dost not wish to keep the commandments, why seekest thou after
   life? If thou art slow to the work, why dost thou hasten to the reward?
   The rich young man in the Gospel said that he had kept the
   commandments; then he heard the greater precepts, "If thou wilt be
   perfect, one thing is lacking to thee, go sell all that thou hast, and
   give to the poor;" thou shalt not lose them, but "thou shalt have
   treasure in heaven; and come and follow Me." [2796] For what shall it
   profit thee, if thou shalt do all the rest, and yet not follow Me?" But
   as ye have heard, "he went away" sad and "sorrowful; for he had great
   riches." What he heard, have we heard also. The Gospel is Christ's
   voice. He sitteth in heaven; but He doth not cease to speak on earth.
   Let us not be deaf, for He is crying out. Let us not be dead; for He is
   thundering. If thou wilt not do the greater things, do at least the
   less. If the burden of the greater be too much for thee, at least take
   up the less. Why art thou slow to both? why settest thyself against
   both? The greater are, "Sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor,
   and follow Me." The less are, "Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not
   commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shall not bear false
   witness. Honour thy father and thy mother; and, Thou shalt love thy
   neighbour as thyself." [2797] These do; why do I call to thee, to sell
   thy possessions, from whom I cannot gain, that thou wouldest keep from
   plundering what is another's? Thou hast heard, "Thou shalt not steal;"
   yet thou dost plunder. Before the eyes of so great a Judge, I find thee
   not a thief only, but a plunderer. Spare thyself, have pity on thyself.
   This life yet allows thee respite, do not refuse correction. Yesterday
   thou wast a thief; be not so to-day too. Or if peradventure thou hast
   been so to-day already, be not so to-morrow. Put a stop sometime to thy
   evil doing, and so require good for a reward. Thou wouldest have good
   things, and wouldest not be good; thy life is a contradiction to thy
   desires. If to have a good country-seat, is a great good: how great an
   evil must it be to have an evil soul!

   2. The rich man "went away sorrowful;" and the Lord said, "How hardly
   shall he that hath riches enter into the kingdom of heaven!" [2798] And
   by putting forth a comparison He showed the difficulty to be such that
   it was absolutely impossible. For every impossible thing is difficult;
   but not every difficult thing is impossible. As to how difficult it is,
   take heed to the comparison; "Verily I say unto you, It is easier for a
   camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter
   into the kingdom of God." [2799] A camel to go through the eye of a
   needle! If He had said a gnat, it would be impossible. And then when
   His disciples heard it, they were grieved and said, "If this be so, who
   then can be saved?" [2800] What rich man? Give ear then to Christ, ye
   poor, I am speaking to the people of God. Ye are more of you poor than
   rich, do ye then at least receive what I say, yet give heed. Whosoever
   of you boast of your poverty, beware of pride, lest the humble rich
   surpass you; beware of impiety, lest the pious rich surpass you; beware
   of drunkenness, lest the sober rich surpass you. Do not glory of your
   poverty, if they must not glory of their riches.

   3. And let the rich give ear, if indeed they are rich; let them give
   ear to the Apostle, "Charge the rich of this world," [2801] for there
   are who are the rich of another world. The poor are the rich of another
   world. The Apostles are the rich of another world, who said, "As having
   nothing, and yet possessing all things." [2802] So that ye may know of
   what poor he is speaking he added, "of this world." Let the "rich" then
   "of this world" give ear to the Apostle, "Charge," he says, "the rich
   of this world, that they be not proud in their conceits." The first
   worm of riches is pride. [2803] A consuming moth, which gnaws the
   whole, and reduces it even to dust. "Charge them," therefore, "not to
   be proud in their conceits, nor to trust in the uncertainty of riches"
   (they are the Apostle's words), "but in the living God." A thief may
   take away thy gold; who can take away thy God? What hath the rich man,
   if he hath not God? What hath the poor man not, if he have God?
   Therefore he says, "Nor to trust in riches, but in the living God, who
   giveth us all things richly to enjoy;" with which all things He giveth
   also Himself.

   4. If then they ought not to "trust in riches," not to confide in them,
   "but in the living God;" what are they to do with their riches? Hear
   what: "Let them be rich in good works." [2804] What does this mean?
   Explain, O Apostle. For many are loth to understand what they are loth
   to practise. Explain, O Apostle; give none occasion to evil works by
   the obscurity of thy words. Tell us what thou dost mean by, "let them
   be rich in good works." Let them hear and understand; let them not be
   suffered to excuse themselves; but rather let them begin to accuse
   themselves, and to say what we have just heard in the Psalm, "For I
   acknowledge my sin." [2805] Tell us what this is, "let them be rich in
   good works. Let them easily distribute." And what is "let them easily
   distribute"? What! is this too not understood? "Let them easily
   distribute, let them communicate." Thou hast, another hath not:
   communicate, that God may communicate to thee. Communicate here, and
   thou shalt communicate there. Communicate thy bread here, and thou
   shalt receive Bread there. What bread here? That which thou dost gather
   with sweat and toil, according to the curse upon the first man. What
   Bread there? Even Him who said, "I am the Living Bread which came down
   from heaven." [2806] Here thou art rich, but thou art poor there. Gold
   thou hast, but thou hast not yet the Presence of Christ. Lay out what
   thou hast, that thou mayest receive what thou hast not. "Let them be
   rich in good works, let them easily distribute, let them communicate."
   [2807]

   5. Must they then lose all they have? He said, "Let them communicate,"
   not "Let them give the whole." Let them keep for themselves as much as
   is sufficient for them, let them keep more than is sufficient. Let us
   give a certain portion of it. What portion? A tenth? [2808] The Scribes
   and Pharisees gave tithes for whom Christ had not yet shed His Blood.
   The Scribes and Pharisees gave tithes; lest haply thou shouldest think
   thou art doing any great thing in breaking thy bread to the poor; and
   this is scarcely a thousandth part of thy means. And yet I am not
   finding fault with this; do even this. So hungry and thirsty am I, that
   I am glad even of these crumbs. But yet I cannot keep back what He who
   died for us said whilst He was alive. "Except your righteousness exceed
   the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
   enter into the kingdom of heaven." [2809] He does not deal softly with
   us; for He is a physician, He cuts to the quick. "Except your
   righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
   shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven." The Scribes and
   Pharisees gave the tenth. How is it with you? Ask yourselves. Consider
   what you do, and with what means you do it; how much you give, how much
   you leave for yourselves; what you spend on mercy, what you reserve for
   luxury. So then, "Let them distribute easily, let them communicate, let
   them lay up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time
   to come, that they may hold on eternal life."

   6. I have admonished the rich; now hear, ye poor. Ye rich, lay out your
   money; ye poor, refrain from plundering. Ye rich, distribute your
   means; ye poor, bridle your desires. Hear, ye poor, this same Apostle;
   "Godliness with sufficiency is a great getting." [2810] Getting is the
   acquiring of gain. The world is yours in common with the rich; ye have
   not a house in common with the rich, but ye have the heaven in common,
   the light in common. Seek only for a sufficiency, seek for what is
   enough, and do not wish for more. All the rest is a weight, rather than
   a help; a burden, rather than an honour. "Godliness with sufficiency is
   great gain." First is Godliness. Godliness is the worship of God.
   "Godliness with sufficiency. For we brought nothing into this world."
   [2811] Didst thou bring anything hither? Nay, not even did ye rich
   bring anything. Ye found all here, ye were born naked as the poor. In
   both alike is the same bodily infirmity; the same infant crying, the
   witness of our misery. "For we brought nothing into this world" (he is
   speaking to the poor), "neither can we carry anything out. And having
   food and covering, let us be therewith content." [2812] "For they who
   wish to be rich." "Who wish to be," not who are. For they who are so,
   well and good. They have heard their lesson, that they be "rich in good
   works, that they distribute easily, that they communicate." They have
   heard already. Do ye now hear who are not yet rich. "They who wish to
   be rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into many hurtful and
   foolish lusts." Do ye not fear? Hear what follows; "which drown men in
   destruction and perdition." [2813] Dost thou not now fear? "for avarice
   is the root of all evil"? [2814] Avarice is the wishing to be rich, not
   the being rich already. This is avarice. Dost thou not fear to be
   "drowned in destruction and perdition"? Dost thou not fear "avarice the
   root of all evil"? Thou pluckest up out of thy field the root of
   thorns, and wilt thou not pluck up out of thy heart the root of evil
   desires? Thou cleansest thy field from which thy body gets its fruit,
   and wilt thou not cleanse thy heart where thy God indwelleth? "For
   avarice is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they
   have erred from the faith, and entangled themselves in many sorrows."

   7. Ye have now heard what ye must do, ye have heard what ye must fear,
   ye have heard how the kingdom of heaven may be purchased, ye have heard
   by what the kingdom of heaven may be hindered. Be ye all of one mind in
   obeying the word of God. God made both the rich and poor. Scripture
   says, "The rich and the poor meet together, the Lord is the Maker of
   them both." [2815] The rich and the poor meet together. In what way,
   except in this present life? The rich and the poor are born alike. Ye
   meet one another as ye walk on the way together. Do not thou oppress,
   nor thou defraud. The one hath need, the other hath plenty. But "the
   Lord is the Maker of them both." By him who hath, He helpeth him that
   needeth; by him who hath not, He proveth him that hath. We have heard,
   we have spoken; let us fear, let us take heed, let us pray, let us
   attain.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2795] Matt. xix. 17.

   [2796] Matt. xix. 21.

   [2797] Matt. xix. 18, 19.

   [2798] Matt. xix. 23.

   [2799] Matt. xix. 24.

   [2800] Matt. xix. 25.

   [2801] 1 Tim. vi. 17.

   [2802] 2 Cor. vi. 10.

   [2803] Serm. xi. (lxi. Ben.) 10 (ix.).

   [2804] 1 Tim. vi. 18.

   [2805] Ps. li. 3.

   [2806] John vi. 51.

   [2807] Vulgate.

   [2808] Luke xviii. 12.

   [2809] Matt. v. 20.

   [2810] 1 Tim. vi. 6.

   [2811] 1 Tim. vi. 7.

   [2812] 1 Tim. vi. 8.

   [2813] 1 Tim. vi. 9.

   [2814] 1 Tim. vi. 10.

   [2815] Prov. xxii. 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXVI.

   [LXXXVI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xix. 21,"Go, sell that thou hast, and
   give to the poor," etc.

   1. The Gospel by the present lesson has reminded me to speak to you,
   Beloved, of the heavenly treasure. For our God hath not, as unbelieving
   covetous men suppose, wished us to lose what we have: if what hath been
   enjoined us be properly understood, and piously believed, and devoutly
   received; He hath not enjoined us to lose, but rather shown a place
   where we may lay up. For no man can help thinking of his treasure, and
   following his riches in a kind of journeying of the heart. If then they
   are buried in the earth, his heart will seek the lowest earth; but if
   they are reserved in heaven, his heart [2816] will be above. If
   Christians therefore have the will to do what they know that they also
   make open profession of (not that all who hear know this; [2817] and I
   would that they who have known it, knew it not in vain); if then they
   have the will to "lift up the heart" above, let them lay up there, what
   they love; and though yet in the flesh on earth, let them dwell with
   Christ in heart; and as her Head went before the Church, so let the
   heart of the Christian go before him. As the members are to go where
   Christ the Head hath gone before, so shall each man at his rising again
   go where his heart hath now gone before. Let us go hence then by that
   part of us which we may; our whole man will follow whither one part of
   us is gone before. Our earthly house must fall to ruin; our heavenly
   house is eternal. Let us move our goods beforehand, whither we are
   ourselves getting ready to come.

   2. We have just heard a certain rich man seeking counsel from the "Good
   Master" as to the means of obtaining eternal life. Great was the thing
   he loved, and of little value was that he was unwilling to renounce.
   And so in perverseness of heart, on hearing Him whom he had but now
   called "Good Master," through the overpowering love of what was
   valueless, he lost the possession of what was of great price. If he had
   not wished to obtain eternal life, he would not have asked counsel how
   to obtain eternal life. How is it then, Brethren, that he rejected the
   words of Him whom he had called "Good Master," drawn out for him as
   they were from the doctrine of the faith? What? Is He a Good Master
   before He teacheth, and when He hath taught, a bad one? Before He
   taught, He was called "Good." He did not hear what he wished, but he
   did hear what was proper for him; he had come with longing, but he went
   away in sadness. What if He had told him, "Lose what thou hast"? when
   he went away sad, because it was said, "Keep what thou hast securely."
   "Go," saith He, "sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor." [2818]
   Art thou afraid, it may be, lest thou shouldest lose it. See what
   follows; "And thou shall have treasure in heaven." Before now it may be
   thou hast set some young slave to guard thy treasures; thy God will be
   the guardian of thy gold. He who gave them on earth, will Himself keep
   them in heaven. Perhaps he would not have hesitated to commit what he
   had to Christ, and was only sad because it was told him, "Give to the
   poor;" as though he would say in his heart, "Hadst Thou said, Give it
   to Me, I will keep it in heaven for thee; I would not hesitate to give
   it to my Lord, the Good Master;' but now thou hast said, Give to the
   poor.'"

   3. Let no one fear to lay out upon the poor, let no one think that he
   is the receiver whose hand he sees. He receives it Who bade thee give
   it. And this I say not out of mine own heart, or by any human
   conjecture; hear Him Himself, who at once exhorteth thee, and giveth
   thee a title of security. "I was an hungred," saith He, and ye gave Me
   meat." And when after the enumeration of all their kind offices, they
   answered, "When saw we Thee an hungred?" He answered, "Inasmuch as ye
   have done it unto one of the least of these of Mine, ye have done it
   unto Me." [2819] It is the poor man who begs, but He that is Rich
   receives. Thou givest to one who will make away with it, He receiveth
   it Who will restore it. Nor will He restore only what He receiveth; He
   is pleased to borrow upon interest, He promiseth more than thou hast
   given. Give the rein now to thy avarice, imagine thyself an usurer. If
   thou wert an usurer indeed, thou wouldest be rebuked by the Church,
   confuted by the word of God, all thy brethren would execrate thee, as a
   cruel usurer, desiring to wring gain from other's tears. But now be an
   usurer, no one will hinder thee. Thou art willing to lend to a poor
   man, who whenever he may repay thee will do it with grief; but lend now
   to a debtor who is well able to pay, and who even exhorteth thee to
   receive what he promiseth.

   4. Give to God, and press God for payment. [2820] Yea rather give to
   God, and thou wilt be pressed to receive payment. On earth indeed thou
   hadst to seek thy debtor; and he sought too, but only to find where he
   might hide himself from thy face. Thou hadst gone to the judge, and
   said, "Bid that my debtor be summoned;" and he on hearing this gets
   away, and cares not even to wish thee well, [2821] though to him
   perhaps in his need thou hadst given wealth by thy loan. Thou hast one
   then on whom thou mayest well lay out thy money. Give to Christ; He
   will of His own accord press thee to receive, whilst thou wilt even
   wonder that He hath received ought of thee. For to them who are placed
   on His right hand He will first say, "Come, ye blessed of My Father."
   "Come" whither? "Receive the kingdom prepared for you from the
   foundation of the world." For what? "For I was an hundred, and ye gave
   Me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave Me drink; I was a stranger, and ye
   took Me in; naked, and ye clothed Me; I was sick and in prison, and ye
   visited Me." And they will say, "Lord, when saw we Thee?" [2822] What
   doth this mean? The debtor presses to pay, [2823] and the creditors
   make excuses. But the trusty debtor will not let them suffer loss
   thereby. "Do ye hesitate to receive? I have received, and are ye
   ignorant of it?" and He makes answer how He has received; "Inasmuch as
   ye have done it unto one of the least of these of Mine, ye have done it
   unto Me." "I received it not by Myself; but by Mine. What was given to
   them came to Me; be secure, ye have not lost it. Ye looked to those who
   were little able to pay on earth; ye have One who is well able to pay
   in heaven. I," He saith, "have received, I will repay."

   5. And what have I received, and what do I repay? "I was an hungred,'
   He saith, and ye gave Me meat;' and the rest. I received earth, I will
   give heaven; I received temporal things, I will restore eternal; I
   received bread, I will give life." Yea, we may even say thus, "I have
   received bread, I will give Bread; I have received drink, I will give
   Drink; I have received houseroom, I will give a House; I was visited in
   sickness, I will give Health; I was visited in prison, I will give
   Liberty. The bread which ye gave to My poor is consumed; the Bread
   which I will give both recruiteth [2824] the failing and doth not
   fail." May He then give us Bread, He who is the living Bread which came
   down from heaven. When He shall give Bread, He will give Himself. For
   what didst thou intend when thou didst lend on usury? To give money,
   and to receive money; but to give a smaller sum, and to receive a
   larger. "I," saith God, "will give thee an exchange for the better for
   all that thou hast given Me. For if thou wert to give a pound of
   silver, and to receive a pound of gold, with how great joy wouldest
   thou be possessed? Examine and question avarice. "I have given a pound
   of silver, I receive a pound of gold!" What proportion is there between
   silver and gold! Much more then, what proportion is there between earth
   and heaven! And thy silver and gold thou wert to leave here below;
   whereas thou wilt not abide thyself for ever here. "And I will give
   thee something else, and I will give thee something more, and I will
   give thee something better; I will give thee even that which will last
   for ever." So then, Brethren, be our avarice restrained, that another,
   which is holy, may be enkindled. Evil altogether is her counsel, who
   hinders you from doing good. Ye are willing to serve an evil mistress,
   not owning a Good Lord. And sometimes two mistresses occupy the heart,
   and tear the slave asunder who deserves to be in slavery to such a
   double yoke.

   6. Yes, sometimes two opposing mistresses have possession of a man,
   avarice and luxuriousness. Avarice says, "Keep;" luxuriousness, says,
   "Spend." Under two mistresses bidding and exacting diverse things what
   canst thou do? They have both their mode of address. And when thou dost
   begin to be unwilling to obey them, and to take a step towards thy
   liberty; because they have no power to command, they use caresses. And
   their caresses are more to be guarded against than their commands. What
   says avarice? "Keep for thyself, keep for thy children. If thou
   shouldest be in want, no one will give to thee. Live not for the time
   present only; consult for the future." On the other hand is
   luxuriousness. Live whilst thou mayest. Do good to thine own soul. Die
   thou must, and thou knowest not when; thou knowest not to whom thou
   shalt leave what thou hast, or who shall possess it. Thou art taking
   the bread out of thine own mouth, and perhaps after thy death thine
   heir will not so much as place a cup of wine upon thy tomb; or if so be
   he place a cup, he will drink himself drunk with it, not a drop [2825]
   will come down to thee. Do well therefore to thine own soul, when and
   whilst thou canst." Thus avarice did enjoin one thing; "Keep for
   thyself, consult for the future." Luxuriousness another, "Do well to
   thine own soul."

   7. But O free man, called unto liberty, be weary, be weary of thy
   servitude to such mistresses as these. Acknowledge thy Redeemer, thy
   Deliverer. Serve Him, He enjoineth easier things, He enjoineth not
   things contrary one to another. I am bold further to say; avarice and
   luxuriousness did enjoin upon thee contrary things, so that thou
   couldest not obey them both; and one said, "Keep for thyself, and
   consult for the future;" the other said, "Spend freely, do well to
   thine own soul." Now let thy Lord and thy Redeemer come forth, and He
   shall say the same, and yet no contrary things. If thou wilt not, His
   house hath no need of an unwilling servant. Consider thy Redeemer,
   consider thy Ransom. He came to redeem thee, He shed His Blood. Dear He
   held thee whom He purchased at so dear a price. Thou dost acknowledge
   Him who bought thee, consider from what He redeemeth thee. I say
   nothing of the other sins which lord it proudly over thee; for thou
   wast serving innumerable masters. I speak only of these two,
   luxuriousness and avarice, giving thee contrary injunctions, hurrying
   thee into different things. Deliver thyself from them, come to thy God.
   If thou wast the servant of iniquity, be now the servant of
   righteousness. The words which they spake to thee, and the contrary
   injunctions they gave thee, the very same thou hearest now from thy
   Lord, yet are His injunctions not contrary. He doth not take away their
   words, but he taketh away their power. What did avarice say to thee?
   "Keep for thyself, consult for the future." The word is not changed,
   but the man is changed. Now, if thou wilt, compare the counsellors. The
   one is avarice, the other righteousness.

   8. Examine these contrary injunctions. "Keep for thyself," says
   avarice. Suppose thou art willing to obey her, ask her where thou art
   to keep? Some well-defended place she will show thee, walled chamber,
   or iron chest. Well, use all precautions; yet peradventure some thief
   in the house will burst open the secret places; and whilst thou art
   taking precautions for thy money, thou wilt be in fear of thy life. It
   may be whilst thou art keeping up thy store, he whose mind is set to
   plunder them, has it even in his thoughts to kill thee. Lastly, even
   though by various precautions thou shouldest defend thy treasure and
   thy clothes against thieves; defend them still against the rust and
   moth. What canst thou do then? Here is no enemy without to take away
   thy goods, but one within consuming them.

   9. No good counsel then has avarice given. See she has enjoined thee to
   keep, yet has not found a place where thou mayest keep. Let her give
   also her next advice, "Consult for the future." For what future? for a
   few and those uncertain days. She says, "Consult for the future," to a
   man who, it may be, will not live even till to-morrow. But suppose him
   to live as long as avarice thinks he will, not as long as she can
   prove, or assure him, or have any confidence about, but suppose him to
   live as long as she thinks, that he grow old and so come to his end:
   when he is even now bent double with old age, and leaning on his stick
   for support, still is he seeking gain, and hears avarice saying still,
   "Consult for the future." For what future? When he is even at his last
   breath she speaks. She says, "for thy children's sake." Would that at
   least we did not find the old men who had no children avaricious. Yet
   to these even, to such as these even, who cannot even excuse their
   iniquity by any empty [2826] show of natural affection, she ceases not
   to say, "Consult for the future." But it may be that these will soon
   blush for themselves; so let us look to those who have children,
   whether they are certain that their children will possess what they
   shall leave? Let them observe in their lifetime the children of other
   men, some losing what they had by the unjust violence of others, others
   by their own wickedness consuming what they possessed; and they remain
   in poor estate, who were the children of rich men. Cease then to be the
   home-born slaves of avarice. But a man will say, "My children will
   possess this." It is uncertain; I do not say, it is false, but at best,
   it is uncertain. But now suppose it to be certain, what dost thou wish
   to leave them? What thou hast gotten for thyself. Assuredly what thou
   hast gotten was not left thee, yet thou hast it. If thou hast been able
   to get possession of what was not left to thee, then will they also be
   able to get what thou shalt not leave to them.

   10. Thus have the counsels of avarice been refuted; but now let the
   Lord say the same words, now let righteousness speak: the words will be
   the same, but not the same the meaning. "Keep for thyself," saith the
   Lord, "consult for the future." Now ask Him, "Where shall I keep?"
   "Thou shalt have treasure in heaven, where no thief approacheth, nor
   moth corrupteth." [2827] Against what an enduring future shalt thou
   keep it! "Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom prepared
   for you from the foundation of the world." [2828] And of how many days
   this kingdom is, the end of the passage shows. For after He had said of
   those on the left hand, "So these shall go away into everlasting
   burning;" of those on the right hand He saith, "but the righteous into
   life eternal." [2829] This is "consulting for the future." A future
   which has no future beyond it. Those days without an end are called
   both "days," and "a day." For one when he was speaking of those days,
   saith, "That I may dwell in the house of the Lord for length of days."
   [2830] And they are called a day, "This day have I begotten thee."
   [2831] Now those days are one day; because there is no time, in it;
   that day is neither preceded by a yesterday, nor succeeded by a
   to-morrow. So then let us "consult for the future:" the words indeed
   which avarice said to thee are not different in terms from this, yet by
   them is avarice overthrown.

   11. One thing may yet be said, "But what am I to do about my children?"
   Hear on this point also the counsel of thy Lord. If thy Lord should say
   to thee, "The thoughts of them concern Me more who did create, than
   thee who didst beget them," [2832] peradventure thou couldest have
   nothing to say. Yet thou wilt look upon that rich man who went away
   sorrowful, and was rebuked in the Gospel, and wilt say to thyself
   perhaps, "That rich man did evil in not selling all and giving to the
   poor, because he had no children; but I have children; I have those for
   whom I should be keeping something. In this weakness too the Lord is
   ready to advise with thee. I would be bold to speak through His mercy;
   I would be bold to say something, not of mine own imagining, but of His
   pity. Keep then for thy children too, but hear me. Suppose (such is
   man's condition) any one should lose one of his children; mark,
   Brethren, mark how that avarice has no excuse, either as respects this
   world or the world to come. Such, I say, is man's condition; for it is
   not that I wish it, but we see instances. Some Christian child has been
   lost: thou hast lost a Christian child; not that thou hast indeed lost
   him, but hast sent him before thee. For he is not gone [2833] quite
   away, but gone before. Ask thine own faith: surely thou too wilt go
   thither presently, where he hath gone before. It is but a short
   question I ask, which yet I suppose no one will answer. Does thy son
   live? Ask thy faith. If he live then, why is his portion seized upon by
   his brothers? But thou wilt say, What, will he return and possess it?
   Let it then be sent to him whither he is gone before; he cannot come to
   his goods, his goods can go to him. Consider only with Whom he is. If
   any son were serving at the Court, and became the Emperor's friend, and
   were to say to thee, "Sell my portion, which is there, and send it to
   me;" wouldest thou find what to answer him? Well, thy son is now with
   the Emperor of all emperors, with the King of all kings, with the Lord
   of all lords; send to Him. I do not say thy son is in need himself; but
   his Lord with whom he is, is in need upon the earth. He vouchsafes to
   receive here, what He gives in heaven. Do what some avaricious men are
   wont to do, make out a conveyance, [2834] bestow upon those who are in
   pilgrimage, what thou mayest receive in thine own country.

   12. But now I am not speaking at all of thyself, but of thy child. Thou
   art hesitating to give what is thine own, yea, rather art hesitating to
   restore what is another's; surely thou art hereby convicted, that it
   was not for thy children that thou wast laying up. See, thou dost not
   give to thy children, seeing thou wilt even take away from thy
   children. From this child at all events wilt thou take away. Why is he
   unworthy to receive his part, because he is living with One worthier
   than all? There would be reason in it, if he with whom thy son is
   living, were unwilling to receive it. Rich shalt thou now be for thine
   house, but that the house of God. So far it is then from me to say to
   thee, "Give what thou hast;" that I am saying to thee, "Pay that thou
   owest." But thou wilt say, "His brothers will have it." O evil maxim,
   which may teach thy children to wish for their brother's death. If they
   shall be enriched by the property of their deceased brother, take heed
   how they may watch for [2835] one another in thine house. What then
   wilt thou do? Wilt thou divide his patrimony, and so give lessons of
   parricide?

   13. But I am unwilling to speak of the loss of a child, lest I seem to
   threaten calamities, which do befall men. Let us speak in some more
   happy and auspicious tone. I do not say then, thou wilt have one less;
   reckon rather that thou hast one more. Give Christ a place with thy
   children, be thy Lord added to thy family; be thy Creator added to thy
   offspring, be thy Brother added to the number of thy children. For
   though there is so great a distance, yet hath He condescended to be a
   Brother. And though He be the Father's Only Son, He hath vouchsafed to
   have coheirs. Lo, how bountifully hath He given! why wilt thou give in
   such barren sort? Thou hast two children; reckon Him a third: thou hast
   three, let Him be reckoned as a fourth: thou hast five, let Him be
   called a sixth; thou hast ten, let Him be the eleventh. I will say no
   more; keep the place of one child for thy Lord. For what thou shalt
   give to thy Lord, will profit both thee and thy children; whereas, what
   thou dost keep for thy children wrongly, will hurt both thee and them.
   Now thou wilt give one portion, which thou hast reckoned as one child's
   portion. Reckon that thou hast got one child more.

   14. What great demand is this, my Brethren? I give you counsel only; do
   I use violence? [2836] As saith the Apostle, "This I speak for your own
   profit, not that I may cast a snare upon you." [2837] I imagine,
   Brethren, that it is a light and easy thought for a father of children
   to suppose that he has one child more, and thereby to procure such an
   inheritance as thou mayest possess for ever, both thou and thy
   children. Avarice can say nothing against it. Ye have cried out in
   acclamation at these words. Turn your words rather against her; let her
   not overcome you; let her not have greater power in your hearts, than
   your Redeemer. Let her not have greater power in your hearts, than He
   who exhorteth us to "lift up our hearts." And so now let us dismiss
   her.

   15. What says luxuriousness? What? "Do well to thine own soul." See
   also the Lord says the same, "Do well to thine own soul." What
   luxuriousness was saying to thee, the same saith Righteousness to thee.
   But consider here again in what sense the words are used. If thou
   wouldest do well to thine own soul, consider that rich man who wished
   to do well to his soul, after the counsel of luxuriousness and avarice.
   His "ground brought forth plentifully, and he had no room where to
   bestow his fruits; and he said, What shall I do?" I have no room where
   to bestow my fruits; I have found out what to do; "I will pull down my"
   old "barns, and build new," and will fill them, "and say to my soul,
   Thou hast much goods; take thy pleasure." Hear the counsel against
   luxuriousness; "Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of
   thee; and whose shall those things be which thou hast provided?" [2838]
   And whither must that soul which shall be required of him go? This
   night it shall be required, and shall go he knows not whither.

   16. Consider that other luxurious, proud, rich man. He "feasted
   sumptuously every day, and was clothed in purple and fine linen;" and
   "the poor man laid at his gate full of sores, and desired" in vain "the
   crumbs from the rich man's table;" [2839] he fed the dogs with his
   sores, but he was not fed by the rich man. They both died; one of them
   was buried; of the other what is said? "He was carried by the Angels
   into Abraham's bosom." The rich man sees the poor man; yea rather it is
   now the poor man sees the rich; he longs for a drop of water on his
   tongue from his finger, from him who once longed for a crumb from his
   table. Indeed their lot was changed. The dead rich man asks for this in
   vain: O let not us who are alive hear it in vain. For he wished to
   return again to the world, [2840] and was not permitted; he wished one
   of the dead to be sent to his brethren, neither was this granted him.
   But what was said to him? "They have Moses and the Prophets;" and he
   said, "They will not hear except one go from the dead." Abraham said to
   him, "If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they
   believe though one go from the dead."

   17. What luxuriousness then said in a perverted sense concerning the
   giving of alms, and procuring rest for our souls against the time to
   come, that so we may "do well to our souls," Moses also and the
   Prophets have spoken. Let us give ear while we are alive. Because there
   he will desire in vain to hear, who has despised these words when he
   heard them here. Are we expecting that one should rise even from the
   dead, and tell us to do well to our own souls? It has been done
   already: thy father hath not risen again, but thy Lord hath risen. Hear
   Him, and accept good counsel. Spare not thy treasures, spend as freely
   as thou canst. This was the voice of luxuriousness: it has become the
   Lord's Voice. Spend as freely as thou canst, do well to thy soul, lest
   this night thy soul be required. Here then ye have in Christ's Name a
   discourse as I think on the duty of almsgiving. This your voice now
   applauding, is then only well-pleasing to the Lord, if He see withal
   your hands active in works of mercy.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2816] Sursum cor.

   [2817] But communicants only, as alone hearing the words in the Office.

   [2818] Matt. xix. 21.

   [2819] Matt. xxv. 40.

   [2820] Conveni Deum.

   [2821] Necsalutare te quærit, cui forte egenti salutem commodando
   præstiteras?

   [2822] Matt. xxv. 34, etc.

   [2823] Convenit.

   [2824] Et reficit et non deficit.

   [2825] See, on the custom of festivals at the funeral of the dead, St.
   Augustin, Ep. 22 (al. 64) to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage and Primate of
   Africa, calling for their abolition. He gives an account of his having
   abolished them at Hippo, where he was only a Priest, in the 29th (167)
   Letter, to his friend Alypius Bishop of Thagaste. See also Conf. vi. 2.

   [2826] Imagine.

   [2827] Matt. xix. 21; Luke xii. 33.

   [2828] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [2829] Matt. xxv. 46.

   [2830] Ps. xxiii. 6.

   [2831] Ps. ii. 7.

   [2832] Vide Serm. ix. 20, 21 (Ben.).

   [2833] Neque enim ille decessit sed præcessit.

   [2834] Fac trajectitium.

   [2835] Attendant.

   [2836] Guttur ligo.

   [2837] 1 Cor. vii. 35.

   [2838] Luke xii. 16, etc.

   [2839] Luke xvi. 19, etc.

   [2840] Superos.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXVII.

   [LXXXVII. Ben.]

   Delivered on the Lord's Day, on that which is written in the Gospel,
   Matt. xx. 1, "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that was a
   householder, who went out early in the morning to hire labourers into
   his vineyard."

   1. Ye have heard out of the Holy Gospel a parable well suited to the
   present season, concerning the labourers in the vineyard. For now is
   the time of the material [2841] vintage. Now there is also a spiritual
   vintage, wherein God rejoiceth in the fruit of His vineyard. For we
   cultivate God, and God cultivateth us. [2842] But we do not so
   cultivate God as to make Him any better thereby. For our cultivation is
   the labour of the heart, not of the hands. [2843] He cultivateth us as
   the husbandman doth his field. In then that He cultivateth us, He
   maketh us better; because so doth the husbandman make his field better
   by cultivating it, and the very fruit He seeketh in us is, that we may
   cultivate Him. The culture He exerciseth on us is, that He ceaseth not
   to root out by His Word the evil seeds from our hearts, to open our
   heart, as it were, by the plough of His Word, to plant the seed of His
   precepts, to wait for the fruit of piety. For when we have so received
   that culture into our heart, as to cultivate Him well, we are not
   ungrateful to our Husbandman, but render the fruit wherein He
   rejoiceth. And our fruit doth not make Him the richer, but us the
   happier.

   2. See then; hear how, as I have said, "God cultivateth us." For that
   we cultivate God, there is no need to be proved to you. For all men
   have this on their tongue, that men cultivate God, but the hearer feels
   a kind of awe, when he hears that God cultivates man; because it is not
   after the ordinary usage of men to say, that God cultivateth men, but
   that men cultivate God. We ought therefore to prove to you, that God
   also doth cultivate men; lest perchance we be thought to have spoken a
   word contrary to sound doctrine, [2844] and men dispute in their heart
   against us, and as not knowing our meaning, find fault with us. I have
   determined therefore to show you, that God doth also cultivate us; but
   as I have said already, as a field, that He may make us better. Thus
   the Lord saith in the Gospel, "I am the Vine, ye are the branches, My
   Father is the Husbandman." [2845] What doth the Husbandman do? I ask
   you who are husbandmen. I suppose he cultivates his field. If then God
   the Father be a Husbandman, He hath a field; and His field He
   cultivateth, and from it He expecteth fruit.

   3. Again, He "planted a vineyard," as the Lord Jesus Christ Himself
   saith, "and let it out to husbandmen, who should render Him the fruit
   in the proper season. And He sent His servants to them to ask for the
   hire of the vineyard. But they treated them despitefully, and killed
   some," [2846] and contemptuously refused to render the fruits. "He sent
   others also," they suffered the like treatment. And then the
   Householder, the Cultivator of His field, and the Planter, and Letter
   out of His vineyard, said; "I will send Mine Only Son, it may be they
   will at least reverence Him." And so He saith, "He sent His Own Son
   also. They said among themselves, This is the heir, come, let us kill
   Him, and the inheritance shall be ours. And they killed Him, and cast
   Him out of the vineyard. When the Lord of the vineyard cometh, what
   will He do to those wicked husbandmen? They answered, He will miserably
   destroy those wicked men, and will let out His vineyard unto other
   husbandmen, which shall render Him the fruits in their seasons." The
   vineyard was planted when the law was given in the hearts of the Jews.
   The Prophets were sent, seeking fruit, even their good life: the
   Prophets were treated despitefully by them, and were killed. Christ
   also was sent, the Only Son of the Householder; and they killed Him who
   was the Heir, and so lost the inheritance. Their evil counsel turned
   out contrary to their designs. They killed Him that they might possess
   the inheritance; and because they killed Him, they lost it.

   4. Ye have just heard too the parable out of the Holy Gospel; that "the
   kingdom of heaven is like unto a householder, which went out to hire
   labourers into His vineyard. He went out in the morning," and hired
   those whom he found, and agreed with them for a denarius as their hire.
   He "went out again at the third hour, and found others," and brought
   them to the labour of the vineyard. "And the sixth and ninth hour he
   did likewise. He went out also at the eleventh hour," near the end of
   the day, "and found some idle and standing still, and he said to them,
   Why stand ye here?" Why do ye not work in the vineyard? They answered,
   "Because no man hath hired us." "Go ye also," said He, "and whatsoever
   is right I will give you." [2847] His pleasure was to fix their hire at
   a denarius. How could they who had only to work one hour dare hope for
   a denarius? Yet they congratulated themselves in the hope that they
   should receive something. So then these were brought in even for one
   hour. At the end of the day he ordered the hire to be paid to all, from
   the last to the first. Then he began to pay at those who had come in at
   the eleventh hour, and he commanded a denarius to be given them. When
   they who had come at the first hour saw that the others had received a
   denarius, which he had agreed for with themselves "they hoped that they
   should have received more:" and when their turn came, they also
   received a denarius. "They murmured against the good man of the house,
   saying, Behold, thou hast made us who have borne the burning and heat
   of the day, equal and like to those who have laboured but one hour in
   the vineyard." And "the good man," returning a most just answer to one
   of them, said, "Friend, I do thee no wrong;" that is, "I have not
   defrauded thee, I have paid thee what I agreed for with thee. "I have
   done thee no wrong," for I have paid thee what I agreed for. To this
   other it is my will not to render a payment, but to bestow a gift. "Is
   it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye
   evil, because I am good?" If I had taken from any one what did not
   belong to me, rightly I might be blamed, as fraudulent and unjust: if I
   had not paid any one his due, rightly might I be blamed as fraudulent,
   and as withholding what belonged to another; but when I pay what is
   due, and give besides to whom I will, neither can he to whom I owed
   find fault, and he to whom I gave ought to rejoice the more." They had
   nothing to answer; and all were made equal; "and the last became first,
   and the first last;" by equality [2848] of treatment, not by inverting
   their order. For what is the meaning of, "the last were first, and the
   first last"? That both the first and last received the same.

   5. How is it that he began to pay at the last? Are not all, as we read,
   to receive together? For we read in another place of the Gospel, that
   He will say to those whom He shall set on the right hand, "Come, ye
   blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you from the
   beginning of the world." [2849] If all then are to receive together,
   how do we understand in this place, that they received first who began
   to work at the eleventh hour, and they last who were hired at the first
   hour? If I shall be able so to speak, as to reach your understanding,
   God be thanked. For to Him ought ye to render thanks, who distributeth
   to you by me; for nought of my own do I distribute. If ye ask me, for
   example, which of the two has received first, he who has received after
   one hour, or he who after twelve hours; every man would answer that he
   who has received after one hour, has received before him who received
   after twelve hours. So then though they all received at the same hour,
   yet because some received after one hour, others after twelve hours,
   they who received after so short a time are said to have received
   first. The first righteous men, as Abel, and Noe, called as it were at
   the first hour, will receive together with us the blessedness of the
   resurrection. Other righteous men after them, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
   and all of their age, called as it were at the third hour, will receive
   together with us the blessedness of the resurrection. Other righteous
   men, as Moses, and Aaron, and whosoever with them were called as it
   were at the sixth hour, will receive together with us the blessedness
   of the resurrection. After them the Holy Prophets, called as it were at
   the ninth hour, will receive together with us the same blessedness. In
   the end of the world all Christians, called as it were at the eleventh
   hour, will receive with the rest the blessedness of that resurrection.
   All will receive together; but consider those first men, after how long
   a time do they receive it? If then those first receive after a long
   time, we after a short time; though we all receive together, yet we
   seem to have received first, because our hire will not tarry long in
   coming.

   6. In that hire then shall we be all equal, and the first as the last,
   and the last as the first; because that denarius is life eternal, and
   in the life eternal all will be equal. For although through diversity
   of attainments [2850] the saints will shine, some more, some less; yet
   as to this respect, the gift of eternal life, it will be equal to all.
   For that will not be longer to one, and shorter to another, which is
   alike everlasting; that which hath no end will have no end either for
   thee or me. After one sort in that life will be wedded chastity, after
   another virgin purity; in one sort there will be the fruit of good
   works, in another sort the crown of martyrdom. [2851] One in one sort,
   and another in another; yet in respect to the living for ever, this man
   will not live more than that, nor that than this. For alike without end
   will they live, though each shall live in his own brightness: and the
   denarius in the parable is that life eternal. Let not him then who has
   received after a long time murmur against him who has received after a
   short time. To the first, it is a payment; to the other, a free gift;
   yet the same thing is given alike to both.

   7. There is also something like this in this present life, and besides
   that solution of the parable, by which they who were called at the
   first hour are understood of Abel and the righteous men of his age, and
   they at the third, of Abraham and the righteous men of his age, and
   they at the sixth, of Moses and Aaron and the righteous men of their
   age, and they at the eleventh, as in the end of the world, of all
   Christians; besides this solution of the parable, the parable may be
   seen to have an explanation in respect even of this present life. For
   they are as it were called at the first hour, who begin to be
   Christians fresh from their mother's womb; boys are called as it were
   at the third, young men at the sixth, they who are verging toward old
   age, at the ninth hour, and they who are called as if at the eleventh
   hour, are they who are altogether decrepit; yet all these are to
   receive the one and the same denarius of eternal life.

   8. But, Brethren, hearken ye and understand, lest any put off to come
   into the vineyard, because he is sure, that, come when he will, he
   shall receive this denarius. And sure indeed he is that the denarius is
   promised him; but this is no injunction to put off. For did they who
   were hired into the vineyard, when the householder came out to them to
   hire whom he might find, at the third hour for instance, and did hire
   them, did they say to him, "Wait, we are not going thither till the
   sixth hour"? or they whom he found at the sixth hour, did they say, "We
   are not going till the ninth hour"? or they whom he found at the ninth
   hour, did they say, "We are not going till the eleventh? For he will
   give to all alike; why should we fatigue ourselves more than we need?"
   What He was to give, and what He was to do, was in the secret of His
   own counsel: do thou come when thou art called. For an equal reward is
   promised to all; but as to this appointed hour of working, there is an
   important question. For if, for instance, they who are called at the
   sixth hour, at that age of life that is, in which as in the full heat
   of noon, is felt the glow of manhood's years; if they, called thus in
   manhood, were to say, "Wait, for we have heard in the Gospel that all
   are to receive the same reward, we will come at the eleventh hour, when
   we shall have grown old, and shall still receive the same. Why should
   we add to our labour?" it would be answered them thus, "Art not thou
   willing to labour now, who dost not know whether thou shalt live to old
   age? Thou art called at the sixth hour; come. The Householder hath it
   is true promised thee a denarius, if thou come at the eleventh hour,
   but whether thou shalt live even to the seventh, no one hath promised
   thee. I say not to the eleventh, but even to the seventh hour. Why then
   dost thou put off him that calleth thee, certain as thou art of the
   reward, but uncertain of the day? Take heed then lest peradventure what
   he is to give thee by promise, thou take from thyself by delay." Now if
   this may rightly be said of infants as belonging to the first hour, if
   it may be rightly said of boys as belonging to the third, if it may be
   rightly said of men in the vigour of life, as in the full-day heat of
   the sixth hour; how much more rightly may it be said of the decrepit?
   Lo, already is it the eleventh hour, and dost thou yet stand still, and
   art thou yet slow to come?

   9. But perhaps the Householder hath not gone out to call thee? If he
   hath not gone out, what mean our addresses to you? For we are servants
   of his household, we are sent to hire labourers. Why standest thou
   still then? Thou hast now ended the number of thy years; hasten after
   the denarius. For this is the "going out" of the Householder, the
   making himself known; forasmuch as he that is in the house is hidden,
   he is not seen by those who are without; but when he "goeth out" of the
   house, he is seen by those without. So Christ is in secret, as long as
   He is not known and acknowledged; but when He is acknowledged, He hath
   gone out to hire labourers. For now He hath come forth from a hidden
   place, to be known of men: everywhere Christ is known, Christ is
   preached; all places whatsoever under the heaven proclaim aloud the
   glory of Christ. He was in a manner the object of derision and contempt
   among the Jews, He appeared in low estate and was despised. For He hid
   His Majesty, and manifested His infirmity. That in Him which was
   manifested was despised, and that which was hidden was not known. "For
   had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory."
   [2852] But is He still to be despised now that He sitteth in heaven, if
   He were despised when He was hanging on the tree? They who crucified
   Him wagged their head, and standing before His Cross, as though they
   had attained the fruit of their cruel rage, they said in mockery, "If
   He be the Son of God, let Him come down from the Cross. He saved
   others, Himself He cannot save." [2853] He came not down, because He
   lay hid. For with far greater ease could He have come down from the
   Cross, who had power to rise again from the grave. He showed forth an
   example of patience for our instruction. He delayed His power, and was
   not acknowledged. For He had not then gone out to hire labourers, He
   had gone out, He had not made Himself known. On the third day He rose
   again, He showed Himself to His disciples, ascended into heaven, and
   sent the Holy Ghost on the fiftieth day after the resurrection, the
   tenth after the ascension. The Holy Ghost who was sent filled all who
   were in one room, one hundred and twenty men. [2854] They "were filled
   with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with the tongues of all
   nations;" [2855] now was the calling manifest, now He went out to hire.
   For now the power of truth began to be made known to all. For then even
   one man having received the Holy Ghost, spake by himself with the
   tongues of all nations. But now in the Church oneness itself, as one
   man speaks in the tongues of all nations. For what tongue has not the
   Christian religion reached? to what limits does it not extend? Now is
   there no one "who hideth himself from the heat thereof;" [2856] and
   delay is still ventured by him who stands still at the eleventh hour.

   10. It is plain then, my Brethren, it is plain to all, do ye hold it
   fast, and be sure of it, that whensoever any one turns himself to the
   faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, from a useless [2857] or abandoned way
   of life, all that is past is forgiven him, and as though all his debts
   were cancelled, a new account is entered into with him. All is entirely
   forgiven. Let no one be anxious in the thought that there remains
   anything which is not forgiven him. But on the other hand, let no one
   rest in a perverse security. For these two things are the death of
   souls, despair, and perverse hope. For as a good and right hope saveth,
   so doth a perverse hope deceive. First, consider how despair deceiveth.
   There are men, who when they begin to reflect on the evils they have
   done, think they cannot be forgiven; and whilst they think they cannot
   be forgiven, forthwith they give up their souls to ruin, and perish
   through despair, saying in their thoughts, "Now there is no hope for
   us; for such great sins as we have committed cannot be remitted or
   pardoned us; why then should we not satisfy our lusts? Let us at least
   fill up the pleasure of the time present, seeing we have no reward in
   that which is to come. Let us do what we list, though it be not lawful;
   that we may at least have a temporal enjoyment, because we cannot
   [2858] attain to the receiving an eternal." In saying such things they
   perish through despair, either before they believe at all, or when
   Christians already, they have fallen by evil living into any sins and
   wickednesses. The Lord of the vineyard goeth forth to them, and by the
   Prophet Ezekial knocketh, and calleth to them in their despair, and as
   they turn their backs to Him that calleth them. "In whatsoever day a
   man shall turn from his most wicked way, I will forget all his
   iniquities." [2859] If they hear and believe this voice, they are
   recovered from despair, and rise up again from that very deep and
   bottomless gulf, wherein they had been sunk.

   11. But these must fear, lest they fall into another gulf, and they die
   through a perverse hope, who could not die through despair. For they
   change their thoughts, which are far different indeed from what they
   were before, but not less pernicious, and begin again to say in their
   hearts, "If in whatever day I turn from my most evil way, the merciful
   God, as He truly promiseth by the Prophet, will forget all my
   iniquities, why should I turn to-day and not to-morrow? Let this day
   pass as yesterday, in excess of guilty pleasure, in the full flow of
   licentiousness, let it wallow in deadly delights; to-morrow I shall
   turn myself,' and there will be an end to it." One may answer thee, An
   end of what? Of mine iniquities, thou wilt say. Well, rejoice indeed,
   that to-morrow there will be an end of thine iniquities. But what if
   before to-morrow thine own end shall be? So then thou dost well indeed
   to rejoice that God hath promised thee forgiveness for thine
   iniquities, if thou art converted; but no one has promised thee
   to-morrow. Or if perchance some astrologer hath promised it, it is a
   far different thing from God's promise. Many have these astrologers
   deceived, in that they have promised themselves advantages, and have
   found only losses. Therefore for the sake of these again whose hope is
   wrong, doth the Householder go forth. As He went forth to those who had
   despaired wrongly, and were lost in their despair, and called them back
   to hope; so doth He go forth to these also who would perish through an
   evil hope; and by another book He saith to them, "Make no tarrying to
   turn to the Lord." [2860] As He had said to the others, "In whatsoever
   day a man shall turn from his most wicked way, I will forget all his
   iniquities," and took despair away from them, because they had now
   given up their soul to perdition, despairing of forgiveness by any
   means; so doth He go forth to these also who have a mind to perish
   through hope and delay; and speaketh to them, and chideth them, "Make
   no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day; for
   suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in the day of
   vengeance He will destroy thee." Therefore put not off, shut not
   against thyself what now is open. Lo, the Giver of forgiveness openeth
   the door to thee; why dost thou delay? Thou oughtest to rejoice, were
   He to open after ever so long a time to thy knocking; thou hast not
   knocked, yet doth He open, and dost thou remain outside? Put not off
   then. Scripture saith in a certain place, as touching works of mercy,
   "Say not, Go, and come again, and to-morrow I will give; [2861] when
   thou canst do the kindness at once; for thou knowest not what may
   happen on the morrow." Here then is a precept of not putting off being
   merciful to another, and wilt thou by putting off be cruel against
   thine own self? Thou oughtest not to put off to give bread, and wilt
   thou put off to receive forgiveness? If thou dost not put off in
   showing pity towards another, "pity thine own soul also in pleasing
   God." [2862] Give alms to thine own soul also. Nay I do not say, give
   to it, but thrust not back His Hand that would give to thee.

   12. But men continually injure themselves exceedingly in their fear to
   offend others. For good friends have much influence for good, and evil
   friends for evil. Therefore it was not the Lord's will to choose first
   senators, but fishermen, to teach us for our own salvation to disregard
   the friendship of the powerful. O signal mercy of the Creator! For He
   knew that had He chosen the senator, he would say, "My rank has been
   chosen." If He had first made choice of the rich man, he would say, "My
   wealth has been chosen." If He had first made choice of an emperor, he
   would say, "My power has been chosen." If the orator he would say, "My
   eloquence has been chosen." If of the philosopher, he would say, "My
   wisdom has been chosen." Meanwhile He says, let these proud ones be put
   off awhile, they swell too much. Now there is much difference between
   substantial size and swelling; both indeed are large, but both are not
   alike sound. Let them then, He says, be put off, these proud ones, they
   must be cured by something solid. First give Me, He says, this
   fisherman. "Come, thou poor one, follow Me; thou hast nothing, thou
   knowest nothing, follow Me. Thou poor and ignorant [2863] one, follow
   Me. There is nothing in thee to inspire awe, but there is much in thee
   to be filled." To so copious a fountain an empty vessel should be
   brought. So the fisherman left his nets, the fisherman received grace,
   and became a divine orator. See what the Lord did, of whom the Apostle
   says, "God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
   things which are mighty, and base things of the world hath God chosen,
   yea and things which are not, as if they were, that those things which
   are may be brought to nought." [2864] And so now the fishermen's words
   are read, and the necks of orators are brought down. Let all empty
   winds then be taken away, let the smoke be taken away which vanishes as
   it mounts; let them be utterly despised when the question is of this
   salvation.

   13. If any one in a city had some bodily sickness, and there was in
   that place some very skilful physician who was an enemy to the sick
   man's powerful friends; if any one, I say, in a city were labouring
   under some dangerous bodily sickness; and there was in the same city a
   very skilful physician, an enemy as I said, of the sick man's powerful
   friends, and they were to say to their friend, "Do not call him in, he
   knows nothing;" and they were to say this not from any judgment of
   their mind, but through dislike of him; would he not for his own
   safety's sake remove from him the groundless assertions [2865] of his
   powerful friends, and with whatever offence to them, in order that he
   might live but a few days longer, call that physician in, whom common
   report had given out as most skilful to drive away the disease of his
   body? Well, the whole race of mankind is sick, not with diseases of the
   body, but with sin. There lies one great patient from East to West
   throughout the world. To cure this great patient came the Almighty
   Physician down. He humbled Himself even to mortal flesh, as it were to
   the sick man's bed. Precepts of health He gives, and is despised; they
   who do observe them are delivered. He is despised, when powerful
   friends say, "He knows nothing." If He knew nothing, His power would
   not fill the nations. If He knew nothing, He would not have been,
   before He was with us. If He knew nothing, He would not have sent the
   Prophets before Him. Are not those things which were foretold of old,
   fulfilled now? Does not this Physician prove the power of His art by
   the accomplishment of His promises? Are not deadly errors overturned
   throughout the whole world; and by the threshing of the world lusts
   subdued? Let no one say, "The world was better aforetime than now; ever
   since that Physician began to exercise His art, many dreadful things we
   witness here." Marvel not at this? Before that any were in course of
   healing, the Physician's residence [2866] seemed clean of blood; but
   now rather as seeing what thou dost, shake off all vain delights, and
   come to the Physician, it is the time of healing, not of pleasure.

   14. Let us then think, Brethren, of being cured. If we do not yet know
   the Physician, yet let us not like frenzied men be violent against Him,
   or as men in a lethargy turn away from Him. For many through this
   violence have perished, and many have perished through sleep. The
   frenzied are they who are made mad for want of sleep. The lethargic are
   they who are weighed down by excessive sleep. Men are to be found of
   both these kinds. Against this Physician it is the will of some to be
   violent, and forasmuch as He is Himself sitting in heaven, they
   persecute His faithful ones on earth. Yet even such as these He cureth.
   Many of them having been converted from enemies have become friends,
   from persecutors have become preachers. Such as these were the Jews,
   whom, though violent as men in frenzy against Him while He was here, He
   healed, and prayed for them as He hung upon the Cross. For He said,
   "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." [2867] Yet many
   of them when their fury was calmed, their frenzy as it were got under,
   came to know God, and Christ. When the Holy Ghost was sent after the
   Ascension, they were converted to Him whom they crucified, and as
   believers drunk in the Sacrament His Blood, which in their violence
   they shed.

   15. Of this we have examples. Saul persecuted the members of Jesus
   Christ, who is now sitting in heaven; grievously did he persecute them
   in his frenzy, in the loss of his reason, in the transport of his
   madness. But He with one word, calling to him out of heaven, "Saul,
   Saul, why persecutest thou Me?" [2868] struck down the frantic one,
   raised him up whole, killed the persecutor, quickened the preacher. And
   so again many lethargic ones are healed. For to such are they like, who
   are not violent against Christ, nor malicious against Christians, but
   who in their delay are only dull and heavy with drowsy words, are slow
   to open their eyes to the light, and are annoyed with those who would
   arouse them. "Get away from me," says the heavy, lethargic man, "I pray
   thee, get away from me." Why? "I wish to sleep." But you will die in
   consequence. He through love of sleep will answer, "I wish to die." And
   Love from above calls out "I do not wish it." Often does the son
   exhibit this loving affection to an aged father, though he must needs
   die in a few days; and is now in extreme old age. If he sees that he is
   lethargic, and knows from the physician that he is oppressed with a
   lethargic complaint, who tells him "Arouse your father, do not let him
   sleep, if you would save his life"! Then will the son come to the old
   man, and beat, and squeeze, or pinch, or prick him, or give him any
   uneasiness, and all through his dutiful affection to him; and will not
   allow him to die at once, die though he soon must from very age; and if
   his life is thus saved, the son rejoices that he has now to live some
   few days more with him who must soon depart to make way for him. With
   how much greater affection then ought we to be importunate [2869] with
   our friends, with whom we may live not a few days in this world, but in
   God's presence for ever! Let them then love us, and do what they hear
   us say, and worship Him, whom we also worship, that they may receive
   what we also hope for. "Let us turn to the Lord," etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2841] Corporalis.

   [2842] Colit nos Deus et colimus Deum. Conf. B. xiii. 1.

   [2843] Colimus enim eum adorando non arando.

   [2844] Indisciplinatum.

   [2845] John xv. 1, 5.

   [2846] Matt. xxi. 33, etc.

   [2847] Matt. xx. 1, etc.

   [2848] Æquando non præposterando.

   [2849] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [2850] Meritorum.

   [2851] Passionis.

   [2852] 1 Cor. ii. 8.

   [2853] Matt. xxvii. 40, 42.

   [2854] Acts i. 15.

   [2855] Acts ii. 4.

   [2856] Ps. xix. 6.

   [2857] Superflua.

   [2858] Meremur.

   [2859] Ezek. xviii. 21.

   [2860] Ecclus. v. 7.

   [2861] Prov. iii. 28.

   [2862] Ecclus. xxx. 23, Vulgate.

   [2863] Idiota.

   [2864] 1 Cor. i. 27, 28.

   [2865] Fabulas.

   [2866] Statio.

   [2867] Luke xxiii. 34.

   [2868] Acts ix. 4.

   [2869] Molesti.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXVIII.

   [LXXXVIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xx. 30, about the two blind men
   sitting by the way side, and crying out, "Lord, have mercy on us, Thou
   Son of David."

   1. Ye know, Holy Brethren, full well as we do, that our Lord and
   Saviour Jesus Christ is the Physician of our eternal health; and that
   to this end He took the weakness of our nature, that our weakness might
   not last for ever. For He assumed a mortal body, wherein to kill death.
   And, "though He was crucified through weakness," as the Apostle saith,
   "yet He liveth by the power of God." [2870] They are the words too of
   the same Apostle; "He dieth no more, and death shall have no more
   dominion over Him." [2871] These things, I say, are well known to your
   faith. And there is also this which follows from it, that we should
   know that all the miracles which He did on the body, avail to our
   instruction, that we may from them perceive that which is not to pass
   away, nor to have any end. He restored to the blind those eyes which
   death was sure sometime to close; He raised Lazarus to life who was to
   die again. And whatever He did for the health of bodies, He did it not
   to this end that they should be for ever; whereas at the last He will
   give eternal health even to the body itself. But because those things
   which were not seen, were not believed; by means of these temporal
   things which were seen, He built up faith in those things which were
   not seen.

   2. Let no one then, Brethren, say that our Lord Jesus Christ doeth not
   those things now, and on this account prefer the former to the present
   ages of the Church. In a certain place indeed the same Lord prefers
   those who "do not see, and yet believe," [2872] to them who see and
   therefore believe. For even at that time so irresolute was the
   infirmity of His disciples, that they thought that He whom they saw to
   have risen again must be handled, in order that they might believe. It
   was not enough for their eyes that they had seen Him, unless their
   hands also were applied to His limbs, and the scars of His recent
   wounds were touched; that that disciple who was in doubt, might cry out
   suddenly when he had touched and recognised the scars, "My Lord and my
   God." [2873] The scars manifested Him who had healed all wounds in
   others. Could not the Lord have risen again without the scars? Yes, but
   He knew the wounds which were in the hearts of His disciples, and to
   heal them He had preserved the scars on His own Body. And what said the
   Lord to him who now confessed and said, "My Lord and my God"? "Because
   thou hast seen," He said, "thou hast believed; blessed are they who do
   not see, and yet believe." Of whom spake He, Brethren, but of us? Not
   that He spake only of us, but of those also who shall come after us.
   For after a little while when He had departed from the sight of men,
   that faith might be established in their hearts, whosoever believed,
   believed, though they saw Him not, and great has been the merit of
   their faith; for the procuring of which faith they brought only the
   movement of a pious heart, and not the touching of their hands.

   3. These things then the Lord did to invite us to the faith. This faith
   reigneth now in the Church, which is spread throughout the whole world.
   And now He worketh greater cures, on account of which He disdained not
   then to exhibit those lesser ones. For as the soul is better than the
   body, so is the saving health of the soul better than the health of the
   body. The blind body doth not now open its eyes by a miracle of the
   Lord, but the blinded heart openeth its eyes to the word of the Lord.
   The mortal corpse doth not now rise again, but the soul doth rise again
   which lay dead in a living body. The deaf ears of the body are not now
   opened; but how many have the ears of their heart closed, which yet fly
   open at the penetrating word of God, so that they believe who did not
   believe, and they live well, who did live evilly, and they obey, who
   did not obey; and we say, "Such a man is become a believer;" and we
   wonder when we hear of them whom once we had known as hardened. Why
   then dost thou marvel at one who now believes, who is living
   innocently, and serving God; but because thou dost behold him seeing,
   whom thou hadst known to be blind; dost behold him living, whom thou
   hadst known to be dead; dost behold him hearing, whom thou hadst known
   to be deaf? For consider that there are who are dead in another than
   the ordinary sense, of whom the Lord spake to a certain man who delayed
   to follow the Lord, because he wished to bury his father; "Let the
   dead," said He, "bury their dead." [2874] Surely these dead buriers are
   not dead in body; for if this were so, they could not bury dead bodies.
   Yet doth he call them dead; where, but in the soul within? For as we
   may often see in a household, itself sound and well, the master of the
   same house lying dead; so in a sound body do many carry a dead soul
   within; and these the Apostle arouses thus, "Awake, thou that sleepest,
   and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light." [2875] It
   is the Same who giveth light to the blind, that awakeneth the dead. For
   it is with His voice that the cry is made by the Apostle to the dead,
   "Awake, thou that sleepest." And the blind will be enlightened with
   light, when he shall have risen again. And how many deaf men did the
   Lord see before His eyes, when He said, "He that hath ears to hear, let
   him hear." [2876] For who was standing before Him without his bodily
   ears? What other ears then did He seek for, but those of the inner man?

   4. Again, what eyes did He look for when He spake to those who saw
   indeed, but who saw only with the eyes of the flesh? For when Philip
   said to Him, "Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us;" [2877] he
   understood indeed that if the Father were shown him, it might well
   suffice him; but how would the Father suffice him whom He that was
   equal to the Father sufficed not? And why did He not suffice? Because
   He was not seen. And why was He not seen? Because the eye whereby He
   might be seen was not yet whole. For this, namely, that the Lord was
   seen in the flesh with the outward eyes, not only the disciples who
   honoured Him saw, but also the Jews who crucified Him. He then who
   wished to be seen in another way, sought for other eyes. And therefore
   it was that to him who said, "Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us;"
   He answered, "Have I been so long time with you; and yet hast thou not
   known Me, Philip? He who hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also."
   [2878] And that He might in the mean while heal the eyes of faith, he
   has first of all instructions given him regarding faith, that so he
   might attain to sight. And lest Philip should think that he was to
   conceive of God under the same form in which he then saw the Lord Jesus
   Christ in the body, he immediately subjoined; "Believest thou not that
   I am in the Father, and the Father in Me?" [2879] He had already said,
   "He who hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also." But Philip's eye was
   not yet sound enough to see the Father, nor consequently to see the Son
   who is Himself Coequal with the Father. And so Jesus Christ took in
   hand to cure, and with the medicines and salve of faith to strengthen
   the eyes of his mind, which as yet were weak and unable to behold so
   great a light, and He said, "Believest thou not that I am in the
   Father, and the Father in Me?" Let not him then who cannot yet see what
   the Lord will one day show him, seek first to see what he is to
   believe; but let him first believe that the eye by which he is to see
   may be healed. For it was only the form of the servant which was
   exhibited to the eyes of servants; because if "He who thought it not
   robbery to be equal with God," [2880] could have been now seen as equal
   with God by those whom He wished to be healed, He would not have needed
   to "empty Himself, and to take the form of a servant." But because
   there was no way whereby God could be seen, but whereby man could be
   seen, there was; therefore He who was God was made man, that that which
   was seen might heal that whereby He was not seen. For He saith Himself
   in another place, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
   God." [2881] Philip might of course have answered and said, "Lord, lo,
   I see Thee; is the Father such as I see Thee to be? forasmuch as Thou
   hast said, He who hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also'?" But before
   Philip answered thus, or perhaps before he so much as thought it, when
   the Lord had said, "He who hath seen Me, hath seen the Father also;" He
   immediately added, "Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the
   Father in Me?" For with that eye he could, not yet see either the
   Father, or the Son who is equal with the Father; but that his eye might
   be healed for seeing, he was to be anointed unto believing. So then
   before thou seest what thou canst not now see, believe what as yet thou
   seest not. "Walk by faith," that thou mayest attain to sight. Sight
   will not gladden him in his home whom faith consoleth not by the way.
   For so says the Apostle, "As long as we are in the body, we are in
   pilgrimage from the Lord." [2882] And he subjoins immediately why we
   are still "in pilgrimage," though we have now believed; "For we walk by
   faith," He says, "not by sight."

   5. Our whole business then, Brethren, in this life is to heal this eye
   of the heart whereby God may be seen. To this end are celebrated the
   Holy Mysteries; to this end is preached the word of God; to this end
   are the moral exhortations of the Church, those, that is, that relate
   to the correction of manners, to the amendment of carnal lusts, to the
   renouncing the world, not in word only, but in a change of life: to
   this end is directed the whole aim of the Divine and Holy Scriptures,
   that that inner man may be purged of that which hinders us from the
   sight of God. For as the eye which is formed to see this temporal
   light, a light though heavenly, yet corporeal, and manifest, not to men
   only, but even to the meanest animals (for for this the eye is formed,
   to see this light); if anything be thrown or fall into it, whereby it
   is disordered, is shut out from this light; and though it encompass the
   eye with its presence, yet the eye turns itself away from, and is
   absent from it; and through its disordered condition is not only
   rendered absent from the light which is present, but the light to see
   which it was formed, is even painful to it. So the eye of the heart too
   when it is disordered and wounded turns away from the light of
   righteousness, and dares not and cannot contemplate it.

   6. And what is it that disorders the eye of the heart? Evil desire,
   covetousness, injustice, worldly concupiscence, these disorder, close,
   blind the eye of the heart. And yet when the eye of the body is out of
   order, how is the physician sought out, what an absence of all delay to
   open and cleanse it, that that may be healed whereby this outward light
   is seen! There is running to and fro, no one is still, no one loiters,
   if even the smallest straw fall into the eye. And God it must be
   allowed made the sun which we desire to see with sound eyes. Much
   brighter assuredly is He who made it; nor is the light with which the
   eye of the mind is concerned of this kind at all. That light is eternal
   Wisdom. God made thee, O man, after His own image. Would He give thee
   wherewithal to see the sun which He made, and not give thee wherewithal
   to see Him who made thee, when He made thee after His own image? He
   hath given thee this also; both hath He given thee. But much thou dost
   love these outward eyes, and despisest much that interior eye; it thou
   dost carry about bruised and wounded. Yea, it would be a punishment to
   thee, if thy Maker should wish to manifest Himself unto thee; it would
   be a punishment to thine eye, before that it is cured and healed. For
   so Adam in paradise sinned, and hid himself from the face of God. As
   long then as he had the sound heart of a pure conscience, he rejoiced
   at the presence of God; when that eye was wounded by sin, he began to
   dread the Divine light, he fled back into the darkness, and the thick
   covert of the trees, flying from the truth, and anxious for the shade.

   7. Therefore, my Brethren, since we too are born of him, and as the
   Apostle says, "In Adam all die;" [2883] for we were all at first two
   persons if we were loth to obey the physician, that we might not be
   sick; let us obey Him now, that we may be delivered from sickness. The
   physician gave us precepts, when we were whole; He gave us precepts
   that we might not need a physician. "They that are whole," He saith,
   "need not a physician, but they that are sick." [2884] When whole we
   despised these precepts, and by experience have felt how to our own
   destruction we despised His precepts. Now we are sick, we are in
   distress, we are on the bed of weakness; yet let us not despair. For
   because we could not come to the Physician, He hath vouchsafed to come
   Himself to us. Though despised by man when he was whole, He did not
   despise him when he was stricken. He did not leave off to give other
   precepts to the weak, who would not keep the first precepts, that he
   might not be weak; as though He would say, "Assuredly thou hast by
   experience felt that I spake the truth when I said, Touch not this. Be
   healed then now at length, and recover the life thou hast lost. Lo, I
   am bearing thine infirmity; drink thou the bitter cup. For thou hast of
   thine own self made those my so sweet precepts which were given to thee
   when whole, so toilsome. They were despised and so thy distress began;
   cured thou canst not be, except thou drink the bitter cup, the cup of
   temptations, wherein this life abounds, the cup of tribulation,
   anguish, and sufferings. Drink then," He says, "drink, that thou mayest
   live." And that the sick man may not make answer, "I cannot, I cannot
   bear it, I will not drink;" the Physician, all whole though he be,
   drinketh first, that the sick man may not hesitate to drink. For what
   bitterness is there in this cup, which He hath not drunk? If it be
   contumely; He heard it first when He drove out the devils, "He hath a
   devil, and by Beelzebub He casteth out devils." [2885] Whereupon in
   order to comfort the sick, He saith, "If they have called the Master of
   the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of His
   household?" [2886] If pains are this bitter cup, He was bound and
   scourged and crucified. If death be this bitter cup, He died also. If
   infirmity shrink with horror from any particular kind of death, none
   was at that time more ignominious than the death of the cross. For it
   was not in vain that the Apostle, when setting forth His obedience,
   added, "Made obedient unto death, even the death of the cross." [2887]

   8. But because He designed to honour His faithful ones at the end of
   the world, He hath first honoured the cross in this world; in such wise
   that the princes of the earth who believe in Him have prohibited any
   criminal from being crucified; and that cross which the Jewish
   persecutors with great mockery prepared for the Lord, even kings His
   servants at this day bear with great confidence on their foreheads.
   Only the shameful nature of the death which our Lord vouchsafed to
   undergo for us is not now so apparent, Who, as the Apostle says, "was
   made a curse for us." [2888] And when as He hung, the blindness of the
   Jews mocked Him, surely He could have come down from the Cross, who if
   He had not so willed, had not been on the Cross; but it was a greater
   thing to rise from the grave than to come down from the Cross. Our Lord
   then in doing these Divine, and in suffering these human things,
   instructs us by His Bodily miracles and Bodily patience, that we may
   believe, and be made whole to behold those things invisible which the
   eye of the body hath no knowledge of. With this intent then He cured
   these blind men of whom the account has just now been read in the
   Gospel. And consider what instruction He has by their cure conveyed to
   the man who is sick within.

   9. Consider the issue of the thing, and the order of the circumstances.
   Those two blind men sitting by the way side cried out as the Lord
   passed by, that He would have mercy upon them. But they were restrained
   from crying out by the multitude which was with the Lord. Now do not
   suppose that this circumstance is left without a mysterious meaning.
   But they overcame the crowd who kept them back by the great
   perseverance of their cry, that their voice might reach the Lord's
   ears; as though He had not already anticipated their thoughts. So then
   the two blind men cried out that they might be heard by the Lord, and
   could not be restrained by the multitudes. The Lord "was passing by,"
   and they cried out. The Lord "stood still," and they were healed. For
   "the Lord Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye
   that I shall do unto you? They say unto Him, That our eyes may be
   opened." [2889] The Lord did according to their faith, He recovered
   their eyes. If we have now understood by the sick, the deaf, the dead,
   the sick, and deaf, and dead, within; let us look out in this place
   also for the blind within. The eyes of the heart are clossd; "Jesus
   passeth by" that we may cry out. What is, "Jesus passeth by"? Jesus is
   doing things which last but for a time. What is "Jesus passeth by"?
   Jesus doeth things which pass by. Mark and see how many things of His
   have "passed by." He was born of the Virgin Mary; is He being born
   always? As an infant was He suckled; is He suckled always? He ran
   through the successive ages of life unto man's full estate; doth He
   grow in body always? Boyhood succeeded to infancy, to boyhood youth, to
   youth man's full stature in several passing successions. Even the very
   miracles which He did are "passed by," they are read and believed. For
   because these miracles are written that so they might be read, they
   "passed by" when they were being done. In a word, not to dwell long on
   this, He was Crucified: is He hanging on the Cross always? He was
   Buried, He Rose again, He Ascended into heaven; "now He dieth no more,
   death shall no more have dominion over Him." [2890] And His Divinity
   abideth ever, yea, the Immortality of His Body now shall never fail.
   But nevertheless all those things which were wrought by Him in time
   have "passed by;" and they are written to be read, and they are
   preached to be believed. In all these things then, "Jesus passeth by."

   10. And what are "the two blind men by the way side," but the two
   people to cure whom Jesus came? Let us show those two people in the
   Holy Scriptures. It is written in the Gospel, "Other sheep I have which
   are not of this fold; them also must I bring, that there may be one
   fold and One Shepherd." [2891] Who then are the two people? One the
   people of the Jews, and the other of the Gentiles. "I am not sent," He
   saith, "but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel." [2892] To whom
   did He say this? To the disciples; when that woman of Canaan who
   confessed herself to be a dog, cried out that she might be found worthy
   of the crumbs from the master's [2893] table. And because she was found
   worthy, now were the two people to whom He had come made manifest: the
   Jewish people, to wit, of whom He said, "I am not sent but unto the
   lost sheep of the house of Israel;" and the people of the Gentiles,
   whose type this woman exhibited whom He had first rejected, saying, "It
   is not meet to cast the children's bread to the dogs;" and to whom when
   she said, "Truth, Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from
   their master's table;" He answered, "O woman, great is thy faith, be it
   unto thee even as thou wilt." [2894] For of this people also was that
   centurion of whom the same Lord saith, "Verily I say unto you, I have
   not found so great faith, no, not in Israel." Because he had said, "I
   am not worthy that Thou shouldest come under my roof, but speak the
   word only, and my servant shall be healed." [2895] So then the Lord
   even before His Passion and Glorification pointed out two people, the
   one to whom He had come because of the promises to the Fathers; and the
   other whom for His mercy's sake He did not reject; that it might be
   fulfilled which had been promised to Abraham, "In thy seed shall all
   nations be blessed." [2896] Wherefore also the Apostle after the Lord's
   Resurrection and Ascension, when He was despised by the Jews, went to
   the Gentiles. Not that he was silent however towards the Churches which
   consisted of Jewish believers; "I was unknown," he says, "by face unto
   the Churches of Judæa which were in Christ. But they heard only that he
   which persecuted us in times past, now preacheth the faith which once
   he destroyed, and they glorified God in me." [2897] So again Christ is
   called the "Corner Stone who made both one." [2898] For a corner joins
   two walls which come from different sides together. And what was so
   different as the circumcision and uncircumcision, having one wall from
   Judæa, the other from the Gentiles? But they are joined together by the
   corner stone. "For the stone which the builders rejected, the same is
   become the head of the corner." [2899] There is no corner in a
   building, except when two walls coming from different directions meet
   together, and are joined in a kind of unity. The "two blind men" then
   crying out unto the Lord were these two walls according to the figure.

   11. Attend now, dearly Beloved. The Lord was "passing by," and the
   blind men "cried out." What is "was passing by"? As we have already
   said, He was doing works which "passed by." Now upon [2900] these
   passing works is our faith built up. For we believe on the Son of God,
   not only in that He is the word of God, by whom all things were made;
   for if He had always continued "in the form of God, equal with God,"
   and had not "emptied Himself in taking the form of a servant," the
   blind men would not even have perceived Him, that they might be able to
   cry out. But when He wrought passing works, that is, "when He humbled
   Himself, having become obedient unto death, even the death of the
   cross," the "two blind men cried out, Have mercy on us, thou Son of
   David." For this very thing that He David's Lord and Creator, willed
   also to be David's Son, He wrought in time, He wrought "passing by."

   12. Now what is it, Brethren, "to cry out" unto Christ, but to [2901]
   correspond to the grace of Christ by good works? This I say, Brethren,
   lest haply we cry aloud with our voices, and in our lives be dumb. Who
   is he that crieth out to Christ, that his inward blindness may be
   driven away by Christ as He is "passing by," that is, as He is
   dispensing to us those temporal sacraments, whereby we are instructed
   to receive the things which are eternal? Who is he that crieth out unto
   Christ? Whoso despiseth the world, crieth out unto Christ. Whoso
   despiseth the pleasures of the world, crieth out unto Christ. Whoso
   saith not with his tongue, but with his life, "The world is crucified
   unto me, and I unto the world," [2902] crieth out unto Christ. Whoso
   "disperseth abroad and giveth to the poor, that his righteousness may
   endure for ever," [2903] crieth out unto Christ. For let him that
   hears, and is not deaf to the sound, "sell that ye have, and give to
   the poor; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the
   heavens that faileth not;" [2904] let him as he hears the sound as it
   were of Christ's footsteps "passing by," cry out in response to this in
   his blindness, that is, let him do these things. Let his voice be in
   his actions. Let him begin to despise the world, to distribute to the
   poor his goods, to esteem as nothing worth what other men love, let him
   disregard injuries, not seek to be avenged, let him give his "cheek to
   the smiter," let him pray for his enemies; if any "one have taken away
   his goods," let "him not ask for them again;" [2905] if he "have taken
   anything from any man, let him restore fourfold." [2906]

   13. When he shall begin to do all this, all his kinsmen, relations, and
   friends will be in commotion. They who love this world, will oppose
   him. What madness this! you are too extreme: [2907] what! are not other
   men Christians? This is folly, this is madness. And other such like
   things do the multitude cry out to prevent the blind from crying out.
   The multitude rebuked them as they cried out; but did not overcome
   their cries. Let them who wish to be healed understand what they have
   to do. Jesus is now also "passing by;" let them who are by the way side
   cry out. These are they "who know God with their lips, but their heart
   is far from Him." [2908] These are by the way side, to whom as blinded
   [2909] in heart Jesus gives His precepts. For when those passing things
   which Jesus did are recounted, Jesus is always represented to us as
   "passing by." For even unto the end of the world there will not be
   wanting "blind men sitting by the way side." Need then there is that
   they who sit by the way side should cry out. The multitude that was
   with the Lord would repress the crying of those who were seeking for
   recovery. Brethren, do ye see my meaning? For I know not how to speak,
   but still less do I know how to be silent. I will speak then, and speak
   plainly. For I fear "Jesus passing by" and "Jesus standing still;" and
   therefore I cannot keep silence. Evil and lukewarm Christians hinder
   good Christians who are truly earnest, [2910] and wish to do the
   commandments of God which are written in the Gospel. This multitude
   which is with the Lord hinders those who are crying out, hinders those
   that is who are doing well, that they may not by perseverance be
   healed. But let them cry out, and not faint; let them not be led away
   as if by the authority of numbers; let them not imitate those who
   became Christians before them, who live evil lives themselves, and are
   jealous of the good deeds of others. Let them not say, "Let us live as
   these so many live." Why not rather as the Gospel ordains? Why dost
   thou wish to live according to the remonstrances of the multitude who
   would hinder thee, and not after the steps of the Lord, "who passeth
   by"? They will mock, and abuse, and call thee back; do thou cry out
   till thou reach the ears of Jesus. For they who shall persevere in
   doing such things as Christ hath enjoined, and regard not the
   multitudes that hinder them, nor think much of their appearing to
   follow Christ, that is of their being called Christians; but who love
   the light which Christ is about to restore to them, more than they fear
   the uproar of those who are hindering them; they shall on no account be
   separated from Him, and Jesus will "stand still," and make them whole.

   14. For how are our eyes made whole? That as by faith we perceive
   Christ "passing by" in the temporal economy, [2911] so we may attain to
   the knowledge of Him as "standing still" in His unchangeable Eternity.
   For then is the eye made whole when the knowledge of Christ's Divinity
   is attained. Let your love apprehend this; attend ye to the great
   mystery [2912] which I am to speak of. All the things which were done
   by our Lord Jesus Christ in time, graft faith in us. We believe on the
   Son of God, not on the Word only, "by which all things were made;" but
   on this very Word, "made flesh that He might dwell among us," who was
   born of the Virgin Mary, and the rest which the Faith contains, and
   which are represented to us that Christ might "pass by," and that the
   blind, hearing His footsteps as He "passeth by," might by their works
   "cry out," by their life exemplifying the profession of their faith.
   But now in order that they who cry out may be made whole, "Jesus
   standeth still." For he saw Jesus now "standing still" who says,
   "Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know
   we Him no more." [2913] For he saw Christ's Divinity as far as in this
   life is possible. There is then in Christ the Divinity and the
   Humanity. The Divinity "standeth still," the Humanity "passeth by."
   What means, The Divinity "standeth still"? It changeth not, is not
   shaken, doth not depart away. For He did not so come to us, as to
   depart from the Father; nor did He so ascend as to change His place.
   When He assumed Flesh, it changed place; but God assuming Flesh, seeing
   He is not in place, doth not change His place. Let us then be touched
   by Christ "standing still," and so our eyes be made whole. But whose
   eyes? The eyes of those who "cry out" when He is "passing by;" that is,
   who do good works through that faith, which hath been dispensed in
   time, to instruct us in our infancy.

   15. Now what thing more precious can we have than the eye made whole?
   They rejoice who see this created light which shines from heaven, or
   even that which is given out from a lamp. And how wretched do they
   seem, who cannot see this light? But wherefore do I speak, and talk of
   all these things, but to exhort you all to "cry out," when Jesus
   "passeth by." I hold up this light which perhaps ye do not see as an
   object of love to you, Holy Brethren. Believe, whilst as yet ye see
   not; and "cry out" that ye may see. How great is thought to be the
   unhappiness of men, who do not see this bodily light? Does any one
   become blind; immediately it is said; "God is angry with him, he has
   committed some wicked deed." So said Tobias' wife to her husband. He
   cried out because of the kid, lest it had come of theft; he did not
   like to hear the sound of any stolen thing in his house; and she,
   maintaining what she had done, reproached her husband; and when he
   said, "Restore it if it be stolen;" she answered insultingly, "Where
   are thy righteous deeds?" [2914] How great was her blindness who
   maintained the theft; and how clear a light he saw, who commanded the
   stolen thing to be restored! She rejoiced outwardly in the light of the
   sun; he inwardly in the light of Righteousness. Which of them was in
   the better light?

   16. It is to the love of this light that I would exhort you, Beloved;
   that ye would cry out by your works, when the Lord "passeth by;" let
   the voice of faith sound out, that "Jesus standing still," that is, the
   Unchangeable, Abiding Wisdom of God, and the Majesty of the Word of
   God, "by which all things were made," may open your eyes. The same
   Tobias in giving advice to his son, instructed him to this, to cry out;
   that is, he instructed him to good works. He told him to give to the
   poor, charged him to give alms to the needy, and taught him, saying,
   "My son, alms suffereth not to come into darkness." [2915] The blind
   gave counsel for receiving and gaining light. "Alms," saith he,
   "suffereth not to come into darkness." Had his son in astonishment
   answered him, "What then, father, hast thou not given alms, that thou
   now speakest to me in blindness; art not thou in darkness, and yet thou
   dost say to me, "Alms suffereth not to come into darkness." But no, he
   knew well what the light was, concerning which he gave his son
   instruction, he knew well what he saw in the inner man. The son held
   out his hand to his father, to enable him to walk on earth; and the
   father to the son, to enable him to dwell in heaven.

   17. To be brief; that I may conclude this Sermon, Brethren, with a
   matter which touches me very nearly, and gives me much pain, see what
   crowds there are which "rebuke the blind as they cry out." But let them
   not deter you, whosoever among this crowd desire to be healed; for
   there are many Christians in name, and in works ungodly; let them not
   deter you from good works. Cry out amid the crowds that are restraining
   you, and calling you back, and insulting you, whose lives are evil. For
   not only by their voices, but by evil works, do wicked Christians
   repress the good. A good Christian has no wish to attend the public
   shows. In this very thing, that he bridles his desire of going to the
   theatre, he cries out after Christ, cries out to be healed. Others run
   together thither, but perhaps they are heathens or Jews? Ah! indeed, if
   Christians went not to the theatres, there would be so few people
   there, that they would go away for very shame. So then Christians run
   thither also, bearing the Holy Name only to their condemnation. Cry out
   then by abstaining from going, by repressing in thy heart this worldly
   [2916] concupiscence; hold on with a strong and persevering cry unto
   the ears of the Saviour, that Jesus may "stand still" and heal thee.
   Cry out amidst the very crowds, despair not of reaching the ears of the
   Lord. For the blind men in the Gospel did not cry out in that quarter,
   where no crowd was, that so they might be heard in that direction,
   where there was no impediment from persons hindering them. Amidst the
   very crowds they cried out; and yet the Lord heard them. And so also do
   ye even amidst sinners, and sensual then, amidst the lovers of the
   vanities of the world, there cry out that the Lord may heal you. Go not
   to another quarter to cry out unto the Lord, go not to heretics, and
   cry out unto Him there. Consider, Brethren, how in that crowd which was
   hindering them from crying out, even there were they who cried out made
   whole.

   18. For observe this too, Holy Brethren, what it is to persevere in
   crying out. I will speak of what many as well as myself have
   experienced in Christ's name; for the Church does not cease to give
   birth to such as these. When any Christian has begun to live well, to
   be fervent in good works, and to despise the world; in this newness of
   his life he is exposed to the animadversions and contradictions of cold
   Christians. But if he persevere, and get the better of them by his
   endurance, and faint not in good works; those very same persons who
   before hindered will now respect him. [2917] For they rebuke, and
   hinder, and withstand him so long as they have any hope that he will
   yield to them. But if they shall be overcome by their perseverance who
   make progress, they turn round and begin to say, "He is a great man, a
   holy man, happy he to whom God hath given such grace." Now do they
   honour him, they congratulate and bless and laud him; just as that
   multitude did which was with the Lord. They first hindered the blind
   men that they might not cry out; but when they continued to cry so as
   to attain to be heard, and to obtain the Lord's mercy, that same
   multitude now says, "Jesus calleth you." And they who a little before
   "rebuked them that they should hold their peace," use now the voice of
   exhortation. Now he only is not called by the Lord who is not in labour
   in this world. But who is there in this life who is not in labour
   through his sins and iniquities? But if all labour, it is said to all,
   "Come unto Me, all ye that labour." [2918] Now if this is said to all,
   why ascribest thou thy miscarriage [2919] to Him that so inviteth thee?
   Come. His house is not too narrow for thee; the kingdom of God is
   possessed equally by all, and wholly by each one; it is not diminished
   by the increasing number of those who possess it, because it is not
   divided. And that which is possessed by many with one heart, is whole
   and entire for each one.

   19. Yet in the mysterious sense of this passage, Brethren, we recognise
   what is expressed most plainly in other places of the sacred books,
   that there are within the Church both good and bad, as I often express
   it, wheat and chaff. Let no one leave the floor before the time, let
   him bear with the chaff in the time of threshing, let him bear with it
   in the floor. For in the barn he will have none of it to bear with. The
   Winnower will come, who shall divide the bad from the good. There will
   then be a bodily separation too, which a spiritual separation now
   precedes. In heart be always separated from the bad, in body be united
   with them for a time, only with caution. Yet be not negligent in
   correcting those who belong to you, who in any way appertain to your
   charge, by admonition, or instruction, by exhortation, or by threats.
   Do it, in whatsoever way ye can. And because ye find in Scripture and
   in the examples of Saints, whether of those who lived before or after
   the coming of the Lord in this life, that the bad do not defile the
   good in unity with them, do not on this account become slow in the
   correction of the bad. In two ways the bad will not defile thee; if
   thou consent not to him, and if thou reprove him; this is, not to
   communicate with him, not to consent to him. For there is a
   communication, when an agreement either of the will or of the
   approbation is joined to his deed. This the Apostle teaches us, when he
   says, "Have no communication with the unfruitful works of darkness."
   [2920] And because it was a small matter not to consent, if negligence
   in correction accompanied it, he says, "But rather reprove them." See
   how he comprehended both at once, "Have no communication, but rather
   reprove them." What is, "Have no communication"? Do not consent to
   them, do not praise them, do not approve them. What is, "But rather
   reprove them"? Find fault with, rebuke, repress them.

   20. But then in the correction and repressing of other men's sins, one
   must take heed, that in rebuking another he do not lift up himself; and
   that sentence of the Apostle must be thought of, "Wherefore let him
   that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall." [2921] Let the
   voice of chiding sound outwardly in tones of terror, let the spirit of
   love and gentleness be maintained within. "If a man be overtaken in a
   fault," as the same Apostle says, "ye which are spiritual restore such
   an one in the spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also
   be tempted. Bear ye one another's burdens, and so shall ye fulfil the
   law of Christ." [2922] And again in another place, "The servant of the
   Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,
   patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God
   peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the
   truth; and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the
   devil, who are held captive by him at his will." [2923] So then be
   neither consenting to evil, so as to approve of it; nor negligent so as
   not to reprove it; nor proud so as to reprove it in a tone of insult.

   21. But whoso forsaketh unity, violateth charity; and whosoever
   violateth charity, how great gifts soever he have, he is nothing. "If
   he speak with the tongues of men and of angels; if he knew all
   mysteries, if he have all faith, so as to remove mountains, if he
   distribute all his goods to the poor, if he give his body to be burned,
   and have not charity; it is nothing; it profiteth him nothing." [2924]
   He possesseth all things to no useful end, who hath not that one thing
   by which he may use all these things well. So then let us embrace
   charity, "studying to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
   peace." [2925] Let not those seduce us who understand the Scriptures in
   a carnal manner, and who in making a bodily separation, are separated
   themselves by a spiritual sacrilege from the good corn of the Church
   which is spread over the whole world. For throughout the whole world
   hath the good seed been sown. That good Sower, the Son of Man, hath
   scattered the good seed not in Africa only, but everywhere. But the
   enemy hath sown tares upon it. Yet what saith the Householder? "Let
   both grow together until the harvest." [2926] Grow where? In the field,
   of course. What is the field? Is it Africa? No! What is it then? Let us
   not interpret it ourselves, let the Lord speak; let us not suffer any
   one to make his guess at his own pleasure. For the disciples said to
   the Master, "Declare unto us the parable of the tares." And the Lord
   declared it: "The good seed," said He, "are the children of the
   Kingdom. But the tares are the children of the wicked one." Who sowed
   them? "The enemy that sowed them," said He," is the devil." What is the
   field? "The field," said He, "is this world." What is the harvest? "The
   harvest," said He, "is the end of the world." Who are the reapers? "The
   reapers," said He, "are the Angels." Is Africa the world? Is this
   present time the harvest? Is Donatus the reaper? Look then for the
   harvest throughout the whole world, throughout the whole world "grow
   unto the harvest," throughout the whole world bear with the tares even
   until the harvest. Let not perverse men seduce you, that chaff so
   light, which flies out of the floor before the coming of the Winnower;
   let them not seduce you. Hold them fast even to this single parable of
   the tares, and suffer them not to speak of anything else. This man, one
   will say, surrendered [2927] the Scriptures; no, not so: but this other
   man surrendered them. Whosoever it might be who has surrendered them,
   has their faithlessness made void the faithfulness of God? What is "the
   faithfulness of God"? That which He promised to Abraham, saying, "In
   thy seed shall all nations be blessed." [2928] What is the faithfulness
   of God? "Let both grow together until the harvest." Grow where?
   Throughout the field. What is throughout the field? Throughout the
   world.

   22. Here they say; "It is true both kinds did once grow throughout the
   world, but the good wheat is diminished, and confined to this our
   country, and our small communion." [2929] But the Lord doth not allow
   thee to interpret as thou wilt. He who explaineth this parable Himself,
   shutteth thy mouth, thy sacrilegious, profane, and ungodly mouth, that
   is counter to thine own interests, while thou runnest counter to the
   testator, even as he calleth thee to the inheritance. How doth He shut
   thy mouth? by saying, "Let both grow together until the harvest."
   [2930] If the harvest hath come already, let us believe that the wheat
   has been diminished. Though not even then shall it be diminished, but
   gathered up into the barn. For so He saith, "Gather ye together first
   the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them, but gather the wheat
   into My barn." If then they grow until the harvest, and after the
   harvest are gathered in, how are they diminished, thou wicked, thou
   ungodly one? I grant that in comparison with the tares and chaff the
   wheat is less in quantity; still "both grow together until the
   harvest." For "when iniquity aboundeth, the love of many waxeth cold;"
   [2931] the tares and the chaff multiply. But because throughout the
   whole world wheat cannot be wanting, which "by enduring unto the end
   shall be saved, both grow together until the harvest." And if because
   of the abundance of the wicked it is said, "When the Son of Man cometh,
   thinkest thou, shall He find faith on the earth?" [2932] and by this
   denomination are signified all those who by transgression of the law
   imitate him to whom it was said," Earth thou art, and unto earth shalt
   thou return;" [2933] yet because of the abundance of the good also, and
   because of him to whom it was said, "Thy seed shall be as the stars of
   heaven, and as the sand of the sea;" [2934] is that also written, "Many
   shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and
   Isaac, in the kingdom of God." [2935] "Both" then "grow together until
   the harvest," and both the tares or chaff have their passages in the
   Scriptures, and the wheat theirs. And they who do not understand them,
   confound them and are themselves confounded; and in their blind desire
   they make such an uproar, that they will not be silenced even by the
   clear manifestation of the truth.

   23. See, they say, the Prophet says, "Depart ye, go ye out from thence,
   and touch no unclean thing;" [2936] how then for peace sake should we
   bear with the wicked, from whom we are commanded to "go out and depart
   that we touch not the unclean thing"? We understand that "departure"
   spiritually, they corporally. For I also cry out with the Prophet (for
   however mean a vessel I am, God maketh use of me to minister to you); I
   also cry out and say to you, "Depart ye, go ye out from thence, and
   touch not the unclean thing;" but with the touch of the heart, not of
   the body. For what is it to "touch the unclean thing," but to consent
   to sin. And what is it to "go out from thence," but to do what
   appertaineth to the rebuking of the wicked, as far as can be done,
   according to each one's grade and condition, [2937] with the
   maintenance of peace? Thou art displeased at a man's sin, thou hast not
   "touched the unclean thing." Thou hast reproved, rebuked, admonished
   him, hast administered, if the case required it, a suitable discipline,
   and such as doth not violate unity; then thou hast "gone out from
   thence." Now consider the actions of the Saints, lest perhaps this
   should seem to be an interpretation of my own. As Saints have
   understood these words, so surely ought they to be understood. "Go ye
   out from them," says the Prophet. I will first maintain this meaning of
   the words from their customary use, and will afterwards show that that
   meaning is not my own. It often happens that men are accused; and when
   they are accused they defend themselves, and when the accused defends
   himself with good reason and justice, the hearers say, "He has got out
   of this." Got out; whither has he gone? He abides still in the place
   where he was, yet has he "got out of this." How has he got out of it?
   By the good account he has rendered, and by his most satisfactory
   defence. This is what the holy Apostles did when they "shook off the
   dust from their feet" [2938] against those who did not receive the
   message of peace which was sent to them. That watchman, "got out from
   thence," to whom it was I said, "I have made thee a watchman unto the
   house of Israel." [2939] For it was told him "If thou warn the wicked,
   and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his way, that wicked one
   shall die in his iniquity, and thou shalt deliver thy soul." [2940]
   This if he do, he "goes out from him," not by a bodily separation, but
   by the defence of his own work. For he did what it was his duty to do;
   though the other, whose duty it was to obey, obeyed not. This then is
   that, "Go ye out from thence."

   24. So cried Moses and Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel. Let us see then if
   they acted thus, if they left the people of God, and betook themselves
   to other nations. How many and vehement rebukes did Jeremiah utter
   against the sinners, and wicked ones of his people. Yet he lived
   amongst them, he entered into the same temple with them, celebrated the
   same mysteries; [2941] he lived in that congregation of wicked men, but
   by his crying out "he went out from them." This is "to go out from
   them;" this is not "to touch the unclean thing," the not consenting to
   them in will, and the not sparing them in word. What shall I say of
   Jeremiah, of Isaiah, of Daniel, and Ezekiel, and the rest of the
   prophets, who did not retire from the wicked people, lest they should
   desert the good who were mingled with that people, among whom
   themselves were able to be such as they were? When Moses himself,
   Brethren, was receiving the law in the mount, the people below made an
   idol. [2942] The people of God, the people who had been led through the
   waves of the Red Sea which gave way to them, and overwhelmed their
   enemies who followed after, after so many signs and miracles displayed
   in plagues upon the Egyptians even unto death, and for "their"
   protection unto deliverance, yet demanded an idol, obtained an idol by
   force, made an idol, adored an idol, sacrificed unto an idol. God
   showeth His servant what the people had done, and saith that He will
   destroy them from before His Face. Moses maketh intercession for them
   as he was about to return to this people; yet had he a good opportunity
   of retiring and "going out from them," as these persons understand it,
   that he might "not touch the unclean thing," might not live among them;
   but he did not so. And that he might not seem to have acted thus from
   necessity rather than from love, God offered him another people; so
   that He might destroy these: "I will make of thee," He said, "a great
   nation." [2943] But he did not accept it; he cleaveth to the sinners,
   he prayeth for the sinners. And how does he pray? O signal proof of
   love, my Brethren! How does he pray? Mark that, as it were, mother's
   fondness, of which I have often spoken. When God threatened the
   sacrilegious people, Moses' tender heart trembled, and on their behalf
   he opposed himself to the wrath of God. "Lord," he says, "if Thou wilt
   forgive their sin, forgive; but if not, blot me out of Thy book which
   Thou hast written." [2944] With what a father's and mother's [2945]
   fondness, yet with what assurance said he this, as he considered at
   once the justice and the mercy of God; that in that He is just, He
   would not destroy the righteous man; and that in that He is merciful,
   He would pardon the sinners.

   25. It is now surely plain to your discernment, [2946] in what manner
   all such testimonies of the Scriptures are to be received; so that when
   Scripture says, that we must depart from the wicked, we are bid to
   understand this in no other sense, but that we depart in heart; lest by
   the separation from the good, we commit a greater evil than we shrink
   from in the union of the wicked, as these Donatists have done. But if
   they were truly good, and so had reproved the wicked, and not rather
   being themselves wicked, had defamed [2947] the good, they would for
   peace sake bear with any, be they who they might, seeing they have
   received the Maximianists [2948] as sound, whom they condemned before
   as lost. Undoubtedly the Prophet has said plainly, "Depart ye, go ye
   out from thence, and touch not the unclean thing." But that I may
   understand what he said, I pay attention to what he did. By his own
   deeds he explains his words. He said, "Depart ye." To whom did he say
   so? To the righteous of course. From whom did he bid them depart? From
   sinners and wicked men of course. I ask then, did he depart from such
   himself? I find that he did not. So then he understood it in another
   sense. For surely he would be the first to do what he enjoined. He
   departed from them in heart, he rebuked and reproved them. By keeping
   himself from consenting to them, he "did not touch the unclean thing;"
   but by rebuking them he "went out" free in the sight of God; and to him
   God neither imputeth his own sins, because he sinned not; nor the sins
   of others, because he approved them not; nor negligence, because he
   kept not silence; nor pride, because he continued in unity. So then, my
   Brethren, how many soever ye have among you, who are still weighed down
   by the love of the world, covetous, or perjured persons, adulterers,
   spectacle hunters, consulters of astrologers, of fanatics, of
   soothsayers, of augurs and diviners, drunkards, sensualists, whatever
   there is of bad that ye know ye have among you; show your
   disapprobation of it all as far as ye are able, that ye may in heart
   "depart;" and reprove them, that ye may "go out from them;" and consent
   not to them, that "ye touch not the unclean thing."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2870] 2 Cor. xiii. 4.

   [2871] Rom. vi. 9.

   [2872] John xx. 29.

   [2873] John xx. 28.

   [2874] Matt. viii. 22.

   [2875] Eph. v. 14.

   [2876] Matt. xi. 15.

   [2877] John xiv. 8.

   [2878] John xiv. 9.

   [2879] John xiv. 10.

   [2880] Phil. ii. 6.

   [2881] Matt. v. 8.

   [2882] 2 Cor. v. 6.

   [2883] 1 Cor. xv. 22.

   [2884] Matt. ix. 12.

   [2885] Mark iii. 22.

   [2886] Matt. x. 25.

   [2887] Phil. ii. 8.

   [2888] Gal. iii. 13.

   [2889] Matt. xx. 32, 33.

   [2890] Rom. vi. 9.

   [2891] John x. 16.

   [2892] Matt. xv. 24.

   [2893] Mereretur.

   [2894] Matt. xv. 26-28.

   [2895] Matt. viii. 10, 8.

   [2896] Gen. xxii. 18.

   [2897] Gal. i. 22-24.

   [2898] Eph. ii. 14, 20.

   [2899] Ps. cxviii. 22.

   [2900] Secundum.

   [2901] Congruere.

   [2902] Gal. vi. 14.

   [2903] Ps. cxii. 9.

   [2904] Luke xii. 33.

   [2905] Luke vi. 30.

   [2906] Luke xix. 8.

   [2907] Nimius.

   [2908] Isa. xxix. 13; Matt. xv. 8.

   [2909] Obtritis.

   [2910] Studiosos.

   [2911] Dispensatione.

   [2912] Sacramentum.

   [2913] 2 Cor. v. 16.

   [2914] Tob. ii. 14.

   [2915] Tob. iv. 10.

   [2916] Temporalem.

   [2917] Obsequentur.

   [2918] Matt. xi. 28.

   [2919] Culpam.

   [2920] Eph. v. 11.

   [2921] 1 Cor. x. 12.

   [2922] Gal. vi. 1, 2.

   [2923] 2 Tim. ii. 24, etc.

   [2924] 1 Cor. xiii. 1-3.

   [2925] Eph. iv. 3.

   [2926] Matt. xiii. 24, etc.

   [2927] The occasion of the Donatist schism was a charge brought against
   Cecilianus, Bishop of Carthage, and Felix, Bishop of Aptunga, who had
   ordained him, of being traditors, that is, of having surrendered such
   copies of the Holy Scriptures as they had in their possession in times
   of persecution.

   [2928] Gen. xxvi. 4.

   [2929] Paucitatem.

   [2930] Matt. xiii. 30.

   [2931] Matt. xxiv. 12.

   [2932] Luke xviii. 8, Vulgate.

   [2933] Gen. iii. 19, Sept.

   [2934] Gen. xv. 5 and xxii. 17.

   [2935] Matt. viii. 11.

   [2936] Isa. lii. 11.

   [2937] Persona.

   [2938] Luke x. 11.

   [2939] Ezek. iii. 17.

   [2940] Ezek. iii. 19.

   [2941] Sacramenta.

   [2942] Exod. xxxii.

   [2943] Exod. xxxii. 10.

   [2944] Exod. xxxii. 32.

   [2945] Visceribus.

   [2946] Prudentiæ.

   [2947] By their false accusations against Cecilian of being a traditor,
   of which they were themselves convicted. Ep. 43 (162), etc. Aug. Serm.
   cxiv. (clxiv Ben).

   [2948] See Serm. xxi. (lxxi. Ben.) 4 (ii.), note.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XXXIX.

   [LXXXIX. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xxi. 19, where Jesus dried up the
   fig-tree; and on the words, Luke xxiv. 28, where He made a pretence as
   though He would go further.

   1. The lesson of the Holy Gospel which has just been read, has given us
   an alarming warning, lest we have leaves only, and have no fruit. That
   is, in few words, lest words be present and deeds be wanting. Very
   terrible! Who does not fear when in this lesson he sees with the eyes
   of the heart the withered tree, withered at that word being spoken to
   it, "Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever"? [2949] Let the
   fear work amendment, and the amendment bring forth fruit. For without
   doubt, the Lord Christ foresaw that a certain tree would deservedly
   become withered, because it would have leaves, and would have no fruit.
   That tree is the synagogue, not that which was called, but that which
   was reprobate. For out of it also was called the people of God, who in
   sincerity and truth waited in the Prophets for the salvation of God,
   Jesus Christ. And forasmuch as it waited in faith, it was thought
   worthy [2950] to know Him when He was present. For out of it came the
   Apostles, out of it came the whole multitude of those who went before
   the ass of the Lord, and said, "Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is
   He that cometh in the Name of the Lord." [2951] There was a great
   company then of believing Jews, a great company of those who believed
   in Christ before He shed His Blood for them. For it was not in vain
   that the Lord Himself had come to none "but to the lost sheep of the
   house of Israel." [2952] But in others, after He was crucified, and was
   now exalted into heaven, He found the fruit of repentance; and these He
   did not make to wither, but cultivated them in His field, and watered
   them with His word. Of this number were those four thousand Jews who
   believed, after that the disciples and those who were with them, filled
   with the Holy Ghost, spake with the tongues of all nations, [2953] and
   in that diversity of tongues announced in a way beforehand, that the
   Church should be throughout all nations. They believed at that time,
   and "they were the lost sheep of the house of Israel;" but because "the
   Son of Man had come to seek and to save that which was lost," [2954] He
   found these also. But they lay hid here and there among thorns, as
   though wasted and dispersed by the wolves; and because they lay hid
   among thorns, He did not come to find them, save when torn by the
   thorns of His Passion; yet come He did, He found, He redeemed them.
   They had slain, not Him so much, as themselves. They were saved by Him
   who was slain for them. For, as the Apostles spake, they were pricked;
   [2955] they were pricked in conscience, who had pricked Him with the
   spear; and being pricked they sought for counsel, received it when it
   was given, repented, found grace, and believing drunk that Blood which
   in their fury they had shed. But they who have remained in this bad and
   barren race, even unto this day, and shall remain unto the end, were
   figured in that tree. You come to them at this day, and find with them
   all the writings of the Prophets. But these are but leaves; Christ is
   an hungred, and He seeketh for fruit; but findeth no fruit among them,
   because He doth not find Himself among them. For He hath no fruit, who
   hath not Christ. And he hath not Christ, who holdeth not to Christ's
   unity, who hath not charity. And so by this chain he hath no fruit who
   hath not charity. Hear the Apostle, "Now the fruit of the Spirit is
   charity;" so setting forth the praise of this cluster, that is, of this
   fruit; "The fruit of the Spirit," he says, "is charity, [2956] joy,
   peace, long-suffering." Do not wonder at what follows, when charity
   leads the way.

   2. Accordingly, when the disciples marvelled at the withering of the
   tree, He set forth to them the value of faith, and said to them, "If ye
   have faith, and doubt not;" [2957] that is, if in all things ye have
   trust in God; and do not say, "God can do this, this He cannot do;" but
   rely on the omnipotence of the Almighty; "ye shall not only do this,
   but also if ye shall say to this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou
   cast into the sea, it shall be done. And all things whatsoever ye shall
   ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive." [2958] Now we read that
   miracles were wrought by the disciples, yea rather by the Lord through
   the disciples; for, "without Me," He says, "ye can do nothing." [2959]
   The Lord could do many things without the disciples, but the disciples
   nothing without the Lord. He who could make [2960] even the disciples
   themselves, was not certainly assisted by them to make them. We read
   then of the Apostles' miracles, but we nowhere read of a tree being
   withered by them, nor of a mountain removed into the sea. Let us
   enquire therefore where this was done. For the words of the Lord could
   not be without effect. If ye are thinking of "trees" and "mountains" in
   their ordinary and familiar sense, it has not been done. But if ye
   think of that tree of which He spake, and of that mountain of the Lord
   of which the Prophet said, "In the last days the mountain of the Lord's
   house shall be manifest;" [2961] if ye think of it, and understand it
   thus, it has been done, and done by the Apostles. The tree is the
   Jewish nation, but I say again, that part of it which was reprobate,
   not that which was called; that tree which we have spoken of is the
   Jewish nation. The mountain, as the prophetic testimony hath taught us,
   is the Lord Himself. The withered tree is the Jewish nation reft of the
   honour of Christ; the sea is this world with all the nations. Now see
   the Apostles speaking to this tree which was about to be withered away,
   and casting the mountain into the sea. In the Acts of the Apostles they
   speak to the Jews who gainsay and resist the word of truth, that is,
   who have leaves and have no fruit, and they say to them, "It was
   necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you:
   but seeing ye have put it from you" (for ye use the words of the
   Prophets, yet do not acknowledge Him whom the Prophets foretold, that
   is, ye have leaves only), "lo, we turn to the Gentiles." For this also
   was foretold by the Prophets; "Behold, I have given Thee for a light of
   the Gentiles, that Thou mayest be My salvation unto the end of the
   earth." [2962] See then, the tree hath withered away; and Christ hath
   been removed unto the Gentiles, the mountain into the sea. For how
   should not the tree wither away which is planted in that vineyard, of
   which it was said, "I will command my clouds that they rain no rain
   upon it"? [2963]

   3. Now that in order to convey this truth the Lord acted prophetically,
   I mean that, as concerning this tree, it was not His will merely to
   exhibit a miracle, but that by the miracle He conveyed the intimation
   of something to come, there are many things which teach and persuade
   us, yea even against our wills force us to believe. In the first place,
   what fault in the tree was it that it had no fruit, when even if it had
   no fruit at the proper season, that is, the season of its fruit, it
   would not assuredly be any fault in the tree; for the tree as being
   without sense and reason could not be to blame. But to this is added,
   that as we read it in the narrative of the other Evangelist who
   expressly mentions this, "it was not the time for that fruit." [2964]
   For that was the time when the fig-tree shoots forth its tender leaves,
   which come, we know, before the fruit; and this we prove, because the
   day of the Lord's Passion was at hand, and we know at what time He
   suffered; and if we did not know it, we ought of course to give credit
   to the Evangelist who says, "The time of figs was not yet." So then if
   it was only a miracle that was to have been set forth, and not
   something to be prophetically figured, it would have been much more
   worthy of the clemency and mercy of the Lord, to have made green again
   any tree He might find withered; as He healed the sick, as He cleansed
   the lepers, as He raised the dead. But then contrariwise, as though
   against the ordinary rule of His clemency, He found a green tree, not
   yet bearing fruit out of its proper season, but still not refusing the
   hope of fruit to its dresser, and He withered it away; as though He
   would say to us, "I have no delight in the withering away of this tree,
   but thus I would convey to you, that I have not designed to do this
   without any cause for it, but only because I desired thereby to convey
   to you a lesson you might the more regard. It is not this tree that I
   have cursed, it is not on a tree without sense that I have inflicted
   punishment, but I have made thee fear, whosoever thou art that dost
   consider the matter, that thou mightest not despise Christ when He is
   an hungered, that thou mightest love rather to be enriched with fruit,
   than to be overshadowed by leaves."

   4. This one thing is that which the Lord intimates that He designed to
   signify by what He did. What else is there? He cometh to the tree being
   hungry, and seeketh fruit. Did He not know that it was not the time for
   it? What the cultivator of the tree knew, did not its Creator know? He
   seeketh on the tree then for fruit which it had not yet. Doth He really
   seek for it, or rather make a pretence of seeking it? For if He really
   sought it, He was mistaken. But this be far from Him, to be mistaken!
   He made then a pretence of seeking it. Fearing to allow this, that he
   maketh a pretence, thou dost confess that He was mistaken. Again, thou
   dost turn away from the idea of His being mistaken, and so run into
   that of His making a pretence. We are parched up between the two. If we
   are parched, let us beg for rain, that we may grow green, lest in
   saying anything unworthy of the Lord, we rather wither away. The
   Evangelist indeed says, "He came to the tree, and found no fruit on
   it." [2965] "He found none," would not be said of Him, unless He had
   either really sought for it, or made a pretence of seeking, though He
   knew that there was none there. Wherefore we do not hesitate, let us by
   no means say that Christ was mistaken. What then? shall we say He made
   a pretence? Shall we say this? How shall we get out of this difficulty?
   Let us say what, if the Evangelist had not said of the Lord in another
   place, we should not of ourselves dare to say. Let us say what the
   Evangelist has written, and when we have said, let us understand it.
   But in order that we may understand it, let us first believe. For,
   "unless ye believe," says the Prophet, "ye shall not understand."
   [2966] The Lord Christ after His Resurrection, was walking in the way
   with two of His disciples, by whom He was not yet recognised, and with
   whom He joined company as a third traveller. They came to the place
   whither they were going, and the Evangelist says, "But He made a
   pretence as though He would have gone further." [2967] But they kept
   Him, saying, in the spirit of a courteous kindness, [2968] that it was
   already drawing toward evening, and praying Him to tarry there with
   them; being received and entertained by them, He breaketh Bread, and is
   known of them in blessing and breaking of the Bread. So then, let us
   not now fear to say, that He made a pretence of seeking, if He made a
   pretence of going further. But here there arises another question.
   Yesterday [2969] I insisted [2970] at some length on the truth which is
   in the Apostles; how then do we find any "pretence" in the Lord
   Himself? Therefore, Brethren, I must tell you, and teach you according
   to my poor abilities, which the Lord giveth me for your benefit, and
   must convey to you what ye may hold as a rule [2971] in the
   interpretation of all Scripture. Everything that is said or done is to
   be understood either in its literal signification, or else it signifies
   something figuratively; or at least contains both of these at once,
   both its own literal interpretation, [2972] and a figurative
   signification also. Thus I have set forth three things, examples of
   them must now be given; and from whence, but from the Holy Scriptures?
   It is said in its literal acceptation, that the Lord suffered, that He
   rose again, and ascended into heaven; that we shall rise again at the
   end of the world, that we shall reign with Him for ever, if we do not
   despise Him. Take all this as spoken literally, and look not out for
   figures; as it is expressed, so it really is. And so also with divers
   actions. The Apostle went up to Jerusalem to see Peter, the Apostle
   actually did this, it actually took place, it was an action peculiar to
   himself. It is a fact which he tells you; a simple fact according to
   its literal meaning. "The stone which the builders refused, is become
   the Head of the corner," [2973] is spoken in a figure. If we take "the
   stone" literally, what "stone did the builders refuse, which became the
   Head of the corner"? If we take "the stone" literally, of what corner
   is this "stone" become the Head? If we admit that it was figuratively
   expressed, and take it figuratively, the Corner-stone is Christ: the
   head of the corner, is the Head of the Church. Why is the Church the
   Corner? Because she has called the Jews from one side, and the Gentiles
   from another, and these two walls as it were coming from different
   quarters, and meeting together in one, she has bound together by the
   grace of her peace. For, "He is our peace, who hath made both one."
   [2974]

   5. Ye have heard instances of a literal expression, and a literal
   action, and of a figurative expression; ye are waiting for an instance
   of a figurative action. There are many such, but meanwhile, as is
   suggested by this mention of the corner-stone, when Jacob anointed the
   stone which he had placed at his head as he slept, and in his sleep saw
   a mysterious [2975] dream, ladders rising from the earth to heaven, and
   Angels ascending and descending, and the Lord standing upon the ladder,
   [2976] he understood what it was designed to figure, and took the stone
   for a figure of Christ, to prove to us thereby that he was no stranger
   to the understanding of that vision and revelation. Do not wonder then
   that he anointed it, for Christ received His Name from "the anointing."
   Now this Jacob was said in the Scripture to be "a man without guile."
   [2977] And this Jacob ye know was called Israel. Accordingly in the
   Gospel, when the Lord saw Nathanael, He said, "Behold an Israelite
   indeed, in whom is no guile." And that Israelite not yet knowing who it
   was that talked with him, answered, "Whence knewest Thou me?" And the
   Lord said to him, "When thou wast under the fig-tree I saw thee;"
   [2978] as though he would say, When thou wast in the shadow of sin, I
   predestinated thee. And Nathanael, because he remembered that he had
   been under the fig-tree, where the Lord was not, acknowledged His
   Divinity, and answered, "Thou art the Son of God, Thou art the King of
   Israel." He who had been under the fig-tree was not made a withered
   fig-tree; he acknowledged Christ. And the Lord said unto him, "Because
   I said, When thou wast under the fig-tree I saw thee, believest thou?
   thou shall see greater things than these." What are these "greater
   things"? "Verily I say unto you" (for he "is an Israelite in whom is no
   guile;" remember Jacob in whom was no guile; and recollect of what he
   is speaking, the stone at his head, the vision in his sleep, the ladder
   from earth to heaven, the Angels ascending and descending; and so see
   what it is that the Lord would say to "the Israelite without guile");
   "Verily I say unto you, Ye shall see heaven opened" (hear, thou
   guileless Nathanael, what guileless Jacob saw); "ye shall see heaven
   opened, and Angels ascending and descending" (unto whom?) "unto the Son
   of Man." Therefore was He, as the Son of Man, anointed on the head; for
   "the head of the woman is the man, and the Head of the man is Christ."
   [2979] Now observe, He did not say, "ascending from the Son of Man, and
   descending to the Son of Man," as if He were only above; but "ascending
   and descending unto the Son of Man." Hear the Son of Man crying out
   from above, "Saul, Saul." Hear the Son of Man from below, "Why
   persecutest thou Me?" [2980]

   6. Ye have heard an instance of a literal expression, as "that we shall
   rise again;" of a literal action, as that, according as it is said,
   "Paul went up to Jerusalem to see Peter." [2981] "The stone which the
   builders refused," is a figurative expression; "the anointed stone"
   which was at Jacob's head, is a figurative action. There is now due to
   your expectation an example made out of both together, something which
   is at once a literal fact, and which also signifies something else
   figured by it. "We know that Abraham had two sons, the one by a
   bondmaid, the other by a free-woman;" [2982] this was literally a fact,
   not only a story, but a fact; are ye looking for that which was figured
   in it? "These are the two Testaments." That then which is spoken
   figuratively, is a sort of fiction. But since it has some real event
   represented by it, and the very figure itself has its ground of truth,
   it escapes all imputation of falsehood. "The sower went out to sow his
   seed; and as he sowed, some fell by the way side, some fell upon stony
   places, some fell among thorns, and some fell upon good ground." [2983]
   Who went out "to sow," or when went he out, or upon what "thorns," or
   "stones" or "way side" or in what field did he sow? If we receive this
   as a fictitious story, we understand it in a figurative sense; it is
   fictitious. For if any sower really went out, and did cast the seed in
   these different places, as we have heard, it were no fiction, and so no
   falsehood. But now though it be a fiction, yet it is no falsehood. Why?
   Because the fiction has some further signification, it deceives thee
   not. It requires only one to understand it, and does not lead any one
   into error. And thus Christ wishing to convey this lesson to us, sought
   for fruit, and hereby set forth to us a figurative, and no deceiving
   fiction; a fiction therefore worthy of praise, not of blame; not one by
   the examination of which we might run into what was false; but by the
   diligent investigation of which we might discover what is true.

   7. I see that one may say, Explain to me; what did that signify, that
   "He made a pretence of going further"? For if it had no further
   meaning, it is a deceit, a lie. We must then according to our rules of
   exposition, and distinctions, tell you what this "pretence of going
   further," signified; "He made a pretence of going further," and is kept
   back from going further. In so far then as the Lord Christ being as
   they supposed absent in respect of His Bodily presence, was thought to
   be really absent, He will as it were "go further." But hold Him fast by
   faith, hold Him fast at the breaking of Bread. What shall I say more?
   Have ye recognised Him? If so, then have ye found Christ. I must not
   speak [2984] any longer on this Sacrament. They who put off the
   knowledge of this Sacrament, Christ goeth further from them. Let them
   then hold It fast, let them not let Him go; let them invite Him to
   their home, and so they are invited to heaven.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2949] Matt. xxi. 19.

   [2950] Meruit.

   [2951] Matt. xxi. 9.

   [2952] Matt. xv. 24.

   [2953] Acts ii. 4.

   [2954] Luke xix. 10.

   [2955] Acts ii. 37.

   [2956] Gal. v. 22.

   [2957] Matt. xxi. 21.

   [2958] Matt. xxi. 22.

   [2959] John xv. 5.

   [2960] The meaning of "facio" as "to do," and "to make," cannot be
   expressed in our language.

   [2961] Isa. ii. 2.

   [2962] Acts xiii. 46, etc.; Isa. xlix. 6.

   [2963] Isa. v. 6.

   [2964] Mark xi. 13.

   [2965] Matt. xxi. 19.

   [2966] Isa. vii. 9, Sept.

   [2967] Luke xxiv. 28.

   [2968] More humanitatis.

   [2969] Probably in that Sermon which is marked as next before this in
   Posidonius' Catalogue, ch. 9, namely, "From the Epistle to the
   Galatians, where Paul reproved Peter." Ben ed. note.

   [2970] Commendavimus.

   [2971] Regulariter.

   [2972] Cognitionem.

   [2973] Matt. xxi. 42; Ps. cxviii. 22.

   [2974] Eph. ii. 14.

   [2975] Magnum.

   [2976] Gen. xxviii. 11, etc.

   [2977] Gen. xxv. 27.

   [2978] John i. 47, etc.

   [2979] 1 Cor. xi. 3.

   [2980] Acts ix. 4.

   [2981] Gal. i. 18.

   [2982] Gal. iv. 22.

   [2983] Matt. xiii. 3, etc.

   [2984] See Serm. vi. (lvi. Ben.) 10 (vi.) note.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XL.

   [XC. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xxii. 2, etc., about the marriage of
   the king's son; against the Donatists, on charity. Delivered at
   Carthage in the Restituta. [2985]

   1. All the faithful [2986] know the marriage of the king's son, and his
   feast, and the spreading [2987] of the Lord's Table is open to them all
   [2988] who will. But it is of importance to each one to see how he
   approaches, even when he is not forbidden to approach It. For the Holy
   Scriptures teach us that there are two feasts of the Lord; one to which
   the good and evil come, the other to which the evil come not. So then
   the feast, of which we have just now heard when the Gospel was being
   read, has both good and evil guests. All who excused themselves from
   this feast are evil; but not all those who entered in are good. You
   therefore who are the good guests at this feast do I address, who have
   in your minds the words, "He that eateth and drinketh unworthily,
   eateth and drinketh judgment to himself." [2989] All you who are such
   do I address, that ye look not for the good without, that ye bear with
   the evil within.

   2. I do not doubt that ye wish to hear, Beloved, who they are of whom I
   have spoken in my address, that they should not look for the good
   without, and should bear with the evil within. If all within are evil,
   whom do I address? If all within are good, whom did I advise them to
   bear with being evil? Let me first then with the Lord's assistance get
   out of this difficulty as best I can. If you consider good perfectly
   and strictly [2990] speaking, none is good but God Alone. Ye have the
   Lord saying most plainly, "Why callest thou Me good? there is none Good
   but One, that is, God." [2991] How then can that marriage feast have
   good and bad guests, if "none is good but God Alone"? In the first
   place ye ought to know, that after a certain sort we are all evil. Yes,
   doubtless after a certain sort are we all evil; but after no sort are
   we all good. For can we compare ourselves with the Apostles, to whom
   the Lord Himself said, "If ye then being evil know how to give good
   gifts unto your children?" [2992] If we consider the Scriptures, there
   was but one evil one among the twelve Apostles, with reference to whom
   the Lord said in a certain place, "And ye are clean, but not all."
   [2993] But yet in addressing them all together, He said, "If ye being
   evil." Peter heard this, John heard this, Andrew heard this, all the
   rest of the eleven Apostles heard it. What did they hear? "If ye being
   evil know how to give good gifts unto your children; how much more
   shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask
   Him?" When they heard that they were evil, they were in despair; but
   when they heard that God in heaven was their Father, they revived. "Ye
   being evil;" what then is due to the evil, but punishment? "How much
   more shall your Father which is in heaven?" What is due to children but
   reward. In the name of "evil" is the dread of punishment; in the name
   of "children" is the hope of heirs.

   3. According to a certain respect then they were evil, who after
   another respect were good. For to them to whom it is said, "Ye being
   evil know how to give good gifts unto your children;" is added
   immediately, "How much more shall your Father which is in heaven?" He
   is then the Father of the evil, but not of those who are to be left so;
   because He is the Physician of them who are to be cured. According to a
   certain sort then they were evil. And yet those guests of the
   Householder at the King's marriage, were not I suppose of that number
   of whom it was said, "they invited good and bad," [2994] that they
   should be reckoned among the number of the bad, who we have heard were
   shut out in his person who was found not to have a wedding garment.
   According to a certain respect, I repeat they were bad, who yet were
   good; and according to a certain respect they were good, who yet were
   bad. Hear John according to what respect they were bad: "If we say that
   we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us."
   [2995] Behold after what respect they were bad: because they had sin.
   According to what respect were they good? "If we confess our sins, He
   is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
   unrighteousness." [2996] If then we should say, on the principle of
   this interpretation which ye have now heard me bring, as I think, out
   of the sacred Scriptures, viz. that the same men are both after a
   certain manner, good, and after a certain manner bad; if we should wish
   to receive according to this sense the words, "they invited good and
   bad," the same persons, that is, at once good and bad; if we should
   wish so to receive them, we are not permitted so to do, by reason of
   that one who was found "not having a wedding garment," and who was not
   merely "cast forth," so as to be deprived of that feast, but so as to
   be condemned in the punishment of everlasting darkness.

   4. But one will say, What of one man? what strange, what great matter
   is it, if one among the crowd "not having a wedding garment" crept in
   unperceived to the servants of the Householder? Could it be said
   because of that one, "they invited good and bad"? Attend therefore, my
   Brethren, and understand. That one man represented one class; for they
   were many. Here some diligent hearer may answer me, and say, "I have no
   wish for you to tell me your guesses; I wish to have it proved to me
   that that one represented many." [2997] By the Lord's present help, I
   will prove it clearly; nor will I search far, that I may be able to
   prove it. God will assist me in His own words in this place, and will
   furnish you by my ministry with a plain proof of it. "The Master of the
   house came in to see the guests." [2998] See, my Brethren, the
   servants' business was only to invite and bring in the good and bad;
   see that it is not said, that the servants took notice of the guests,
   and found among them a man which had not on a wedding garment, and
   spoke to him. This is not written. The Master of the house saw him, the
   Master of the house discovered, the Master of the house inspected, the
   Master of the house separated him out. It was not right to pass over
   this. But I have undertaken to establish another point, how that that
   one signifies many. "The Master of the house" then "came in to see the
   guests, and He found there a man which had not on a wedding garment.
   And He saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a
   wedding garment? And he was speechless." [2999] For He who questioned
   him was One, to whom he could give no feigned reply. The garment that
   was looked for is in the heart, not on the body; for had it been put on
   externally, it could not have been concealed even from the servants.
   Where that wedding garment must be put on, hear in the words, "Let thy
   priests be clothed with righteousness." [3000] Of that garment the
   Apostle speaks, [3001] "If so be that we shall be found clothed, and
   not naked." [3002] Therefore was he discovered by the Lord, who escaped
   the notice of the servants. Being questioned, he is speechless: he is
   bound, cast out, and condemned one by many. I have said, Lord, that
   Thou teachest us that in this Thou dost give warning to all. Recollect
   then with me, my Brethren, the words which ye have heard, and ye will
   at once discover, at once determine, that that one was many. True it
   was one man whom the Lord questioned, to one He said, "Friend, how
   camest thou in hither?" It was one who was speechless, and of that same
   one was it said, "Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer
   darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." [3003] Why?
   "For many are called, but few chosen." [3004] How can any one gainsay
   this manifestation of the truth? "Cast him," He saith, "into outer
   darkness." "Him," that one man assuredly, of whom the Lord saith, "for
   many are called, but few chosen." So then it is the few who are not
   cast out. He was it is true but one man "who had not the wedding
   garment. Cast him out." But why is he cast out? "For many are called,
   but few chosen." Leave alone the few, cast out the many. It is true,
   that man was but one. Yet undoubtedly that one not only was many, but
   those many in numbers far surpassed the number of the good. For the
   good are many also; but in comparison of the bad, they are few. In the
   crop there is much wheat; compare it with the chaff, and the grains of
   corn are few. The same persons considered in themselves are many, in
   comparison with the bad are few. How do we prove that in themselves
   they are many? "Many shall come from the East and from the West."
   Whither shall they come? To that feast, into which both good and bad
   enter. But speaking of another feast, He subjoined, "and shall sit down
   with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven." [3005]
   That is the feast to which the bad shall not approach. Be that feast
   which now is, received worthily, that we may attain to the other. The
   same then are many, who are also few; in themselves many; in comparison
   with the bad few. Therefore what saith the Lord? He found one, and
   said, "Let the many be cast out, the few remain." For to say, "many are
   called, but few chosen," is nothing else than to show plainly who in
   this present feast are accounted to be such, as to be brought to that
   other feast, where no bad men shall come.

   5. What is it then? I would not that ye all who approach the Lord's
   Table which is in this life, should be with the many who are to be shut
   out, but with the few who are to be reserved. And how shall ye be able
   to attain to this? Take "the wedding garment." Ye will say, "Explain
   this wedding garment' to us." Without a doubt, that is the garment
   which none but the good have, who are to be left at the feast, reserved
   unto that other feast to which no bad man approaches, who are to be
   brought safely thither by the grace of the Lord; these have "the
   wedding garment." Let us then, my Brethren, seek for those among the
   faithful who have something which bad men have not, and this will be
   "the wedding garment." If we speak of sacraments, ye see how that these
   are common to the bad and good. Is it Baptism? Without Baptism it is
   true no one attaineth to God; but not every one that hath Baptism
   attaineth to Him. I cannot therefore understand Baptism, the Sacrament
   itself that is, to be "the wedding garment;" for this garment I see in
   the good, I see in the bad. Peradventure it is the Altar, or That which
   is received at the Altar. But no; we see that many eat, and "eat and
   drink judgment to themselves." What is it then? Is it fasting? The
   wicked fast also. Is it running together to the Church? The wicked run
   thither also. Lastly, is it miracles? Not only do the good and bad
   perform them, but sometimes the good perform them not. See, among the
   ancient people Pharaoh's magicians wrought miracles, the Israelites did
   not; among the Israelites, Moses only and Aaron wrought them; the rest
   did not, but saw, and feared, and believed. [3006] Were the magicians
   of Pharaoh who did miracles, better men than the people of Israel who
   could not do them, and yet that people were the people of God. In the
   Church itself, hear the Apostle, "Are all prophets? Have all the gifts
   of healing? Do all speak with tongues?" [3007]

   6. What is that "wedding garment" then? This is the wedding garment:
   "Now the end of the commandment," says the Apostle, "is charity out of
   a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned." [3008]
   This is "the wedding garment." Not charity of any kind whatever; for
   very often they who are partakers together of an evil conscience seem
   to love one another. They who commit robberies together, who love the
   hurtful arts of sorceries, and the stage together, who join together in
   the shout of the chariot race, or the wild beast fight; these very
   often love one another; but in these there is no "charity out of a pure
   heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. The wedding
   garment" is such charity as this. "Though I speak with the tongues of
   men and of Angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass,
   and a tinkling cymbal." [3009] Tongues have come in alone, and it is
   said to them, "How came ye in hither not having a wedding garment?"
   "Though," said he, "I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
   mysteries, and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that I
   could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing." See, these
   are the miracles of men who very often have not "the wedding garment."
   "Though," he says, "I have all these, and have not Christ, I am
   nothing." Is then "the gift of prophecy" nothing? is then "the
   knowledge of mysteries" [3010] nothing? It is not that these are
   nothing; but "I," if I have them, "and have not charity, am nothing."
   How many good things profit nothing without this one good thing! If
   then I have not charity, though I bestow alms freely upon the poor,
   though I have come to the confession of Christ's Name even unto blood
   and fire, these things may be done even through the love of glory, and
   so are vain. Because then they may be done even from the love of glory,
   and so be vain, and not through the rich charity of a godly affection,
   he names them all also in express terms, and do thou give ear to them;
   "though I distribute all my goods for the use of the poor, and though I
   give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me
   nothing." [3011] This then is "the wedding garment." Question
   yourselves; if ye have it, ye may be without fear in the Feast of the
   Lord. In one and the same man there exist two things, charity and
   desire. Let charity be born in thee, if it be yet unborn, and if it be
   born, be it nourished, fostered, increased. But as to that desire,
   though in this life it cannot be utterly extinguished; "for if we say
   that we have no sin we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us;"
   [3012] but in so far as desire is in us, so far we are not without sin:
   let charity increase, desire decrease; that the one, that is, charity,
   may one day be perfected, and desire be consumed. Put on "the wedding
   garment:" you I address, who as yet have it not. Ye are already within,
   already do ye approach to the Feast, and still have ye not yet the
   garment to do honour to the Bridegroom; "Ye are yet seeking your own
   things, not the things which are Jesus Christ's." [3013] For "the
   wedding garment" is taken in honour of the union, the union, that is,
   of the Bridegroom to the Bride. Ye know the Bridegroom; it is Christ.
   Ye know the Bride; it is the Church. Pay honour [3014] to the Bride,
   pay honour to the Bridegroom. If ye pay due honour to them both, ye
   will be their children. Therefore in this make progress. Love the Lord,
   and so learn to love yourselves; that when by loving the Lord ye shall
   have loved yourselves, ye may securely love your neighbour as
   yourselves. For when I find a man that does not love himself, how shall
   I commit his neighbour whom he should love as himself to him? And who
   is there, you will say, who does not love himself? Who is there? See,
   "He that loveth iniquity hateth his own soul." [3015] Does he love
   himself, who loves his body, and hates his soul to his own hurt, to the
   hurt of both his body and soul? And who loves his own soul? He that
   loveth God with all his heart and with all his mind. To such an one I
   would at once entrust his neighbour. "Love your neighbour as
   yourselves."

   7. One may say, "Who is my neighbour?" Every man is your neighbour. Had
   we not all the same two parents? Animals of every species are
   neighbours one to the other, the dove to the dove, the leopard to the
   leopard, the asp to the asp, the sheep to the sheep, and is not man
   neighbour to man? Call to mind the ordering of the creation. God spake,
   the waters brought forth swimming creatures, great whales, fish, birds,
   and such like things. Did all the birds come of one bird? Did all
   vultures come of one vulture? Did all doves come of one dove? Did all
   snakes come of one snake? or all gilt-heads of one gilt-head? [3016] or
   all sheep of one sheep? No, the earth assuredly brought forth all these
   kinds together. But when it came to man, the earth did not bring forth
   man. One father was made for us; not even two, father and mother: one
   father, I say, was made for us, not even two, father and mother; but
   out of the one father came the one mother; the one father came from
   none, but was made by God, and the one mother came out of him. Mark
   then the nature of our race: we flowed out of one fountain; and because
   that one was turned to bitterness, we all became from a good, a wild
   olive tree. And so grace came also. One begat us unto sin and death,
   yet as one race, yet as neighbours one to another, yet as not merely
   like, but related to each other. There came One against one; against
   the one who scattered, One who gathereth. Thus against the one who
   slayeth, is the One who maketh alive. "For as in Adam all die, even so
   in Christ shall all be made alive." [3017] Now as whosoever is born of
   the first, dieth; so whosoever believeth in Christ is made alive.
   Provided, that is, that he have "the wedding garment," and be invited
   as one who is to remain, and not to be cast out.

   8. So then, my Brethren, have charity. I have explained it to be this
   garment, this "wedding garment." Faith is praised, it is plain, it is
   praised: but what kind of faith this is, the Apostle distinguishes. For
   certain who boasted of faith, and had not a good conversation, the
   Apostle James rebukes and says, "Thou believest there is one God, thou
   doest well; the devils also believe and tremble." [3018] Call to mind
   with me whereupon Peter was praised, whereupon called blessed. Was it
   because he said, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God"?
   [3019] He who pronounced Him blessed, regarded not the sound of the
   words, but the affection of the heart. For would ye know that Peter's
   blessedness lay not in these words? The devils also said the same. "We
   know Thee who Thou art, the Son of God." [3020] Peter confessed Him to
   be "the Son of God;" the devils confessed Him to be "the Son of God."
   "Distinguish, my lord, distinguish between the two." I do make a plain
   distinction. Peter spake in love, the devils from fear. And again Peter
   says, "I am with Thee, even unto death." [3021] The devils say, "What
   have we to do with Thee?" So then thou who art come to the feast, glory
   not of faith only. Distinguish well the nature of this faith; and then
   in thee is recognised "the wedding garment." Let the Apostle make the
   distinction, let him teach us; "neither circumcision availeth anything,
   nor uncircumcision, but faith." [3022] Tell us, what faith? do not even
   the devils believe and tremble? I will tell thee, he says, and listen,
   I will now draw the distinction, "But faith which worketh by love."
   What faith, then, and of what kind? "That which worketh by love."
   "Though I have all knowledge," he says, "and all faith, so that I could
   remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing." Have faith with
   love; for love without faith ye cannot have. This I warn, this I
   exhort, this in the name of the Lord I teach you, Beloved, that ye have
   faith with love; for ye may possibly have faith without love. I do not
   exhort you to have faith, but love. For ye cannot have love without
   faith; the love I mean of God and your neighbour; whence can it come
   without faith? How doth he love God, who doth not believe on God? How
   doth the fool love God, "who saith in his heart, there is no God"?
   [3023] Possible it is that ye may believe that Christ hath come and not
   love Christ. But it is not possible that ye should love Christ, and yet
   say that Christ hath not come.

   9. So then, have faith with love. This is the "wedding garment." Ye who
   love Christ, love one another, love your friends, love your enemies.
   Let not this be hard to you. What then do ye lose thereby, when ye gain
   so much? What? dost thou ask of God as some great favour, that thine
   enemy may die? This is not "the wedding garment." Turn thy thoughts to
   the Bridegroom Himself hanging upon the Cross for thee, and praying to
   His Father for His enemies; "Father," saith He, "forgive them, for they
   know not what they do." [3024] Thou hast seen the Bridegroom speaking
   thus; see too the friend of the Bridegroom, a guest "with the wedding
   garment." Look at the blessed Stephen, how he rebukes the Jews as
   though in rage and resentment, "Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in
   heart and ears, ye have resisted the Holy Ghost. Which of the Prophets
   have not your fathers killed?" [3025] Thou hast heard how severe he is
   with his tongue. And at [3026] once thou art prepared to speak against
   any one; and I would it were against him who offendeth God, and not who
   offendeth thee. One offendeth God, and thou dost not rebuke him; he
   offendeth thee, and thou criest out; where is that "wedding garment"?
   Ye have heard therefore how Stephen was severe; now hear how he loved.
   He offended those whom he was rebuking, and was stoned by them. And as
   he was being overwhelmed and bruised to death by the hands of his
   furious persecutors on every side, and the blows of the stones, he
   first said, "Lord Jesus Christ, receive my spirit." [3027] Then after
   he had prayed for himself standing, he bent the knee for them who were
   stoning him, and said, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge; let me
   die in my body, but let not these die in their souls. And when he had
   said this, he fell asleep." [3028] After these words he added no more;
   he spake them and departed; his last prayer was for his enemies. Learn
   ye hereby to have "the wedding garment." So do thou too bend the knee,
   and beat thy forehead against the ground, and as thou art about to
   approach the Table of the Lord, the Feast of the Holy Scriptures, do
   not say, "O that mine enemy might die! Lord, if I have deserved ought
   of Thee, slay mine enemy." Because if so be that thou sayest so, dost
   thou not fear lest He should answer thee, "If I should choose to slay
   thine enemy, I should first slay thee. What! dost thou glory because
   thou hast now come invited hither? Think only what thou wast but a
   little while ago. Hast thou not blasphemed Me? hast thou not derided
   Me? didst thou not wish to wipe out My Name from off the earth? Yet now
   thou dost applaud thyself because thou hast come invited hither! If I
   had slain thee when thou wast Mine enemy, how could I have made thee My
   friend? Why, by thy wicked prayers dost thou teach Me to do, what I did
   not in thine own case?" Yea rather God saith to thee, "Let me teach
   thee to imitate Me. When I was hanging on the Cross, I said, Forgive
   them, for they know not what they do.' [3029] This lesson I taught My
   brave soldier. Be thou My recruit against the devil. In no other way
   wilt thou fight at all unconquerably, unless thou dost pray for thine
   enemies. Yet by all means ask this, yea ask this very thing, ask that
   thou mayest persecute thine enemy; but ask it with discernment;
   distinguish well what thou askest. See, a man is thine enemy; answer
   me, what is it in him which is at enmity with thee? Is it in this, that
   he is a man, that he is at enmity with thee? No. What then? That he is
   evil. In that he is a man, in that he is that I made him, he is not at
   enmity with thee." He saith to thee, "I did not make man evil; he
   became evil by disobedience, who obeyed the devil [3030] rather than
   God. What he has made himself, is at enmity with thee; in that he is
   evil, he is thine enemy; not in that he is a man. For I hear the word
   "man," and "evil;" the one is the name of nature, the other of sin; the
   sin I cure; and the nature I preserve." And so thy God saith to thee,
   "See, I do avenge thee, I do slay thine enemy; I take away that which
   makes him evil, I preserve that which constitutes him a man: now if I
   shall have made him a good man, have I not slain thine enemy, and made
   him thy friend?" So ask on what thou art asking, not that the men may
   perish, but that these their enmities may perish. For if thou pray for
   this, that the man may die; it is the prayer of one wicked man against
   another; and when thou dost say, "Slay the wicked one," God answereth
   thee, "Which of you?"

   10. Extend your love then, and limit it not to your wives and children.
   Such love is found even in beasts and sparrows. Ye know the sparrows
   and the swallows how they love their mates, how together they hatch
   their eggs, and nourish their young together, by a sort of free [3031]
   and natural kindliness, and with no thought of a return. For the
   sparrow does not say, "I will nourish my young, that when I am grown
   old, they may feed me." He has no such thought; he loves and feeds
   them, for the love of them; displays the affection of a parent, and
   looks for no return. And so, I know, I am sure, do ye love your
   children. "For the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but
   the parents for the children." [3032] Yea upon this plea it is that
   many of you excuse your covetousness, that ye are getting for your
   children, and are laying by for them. [3033] But I say, extend your
   love, let this love grow; for to love wives and children, is not yet
   that "wedding garment." Have faith to Godward. First love God. Extend
   yourselves out to God; and whomsoever ye shall be able, draw on to God.
   There is thine enemy: let him be drawn to God. There is a son, a wife,
   a servant; let them be all drawn to God. There is a stranger; let him
   be drawn to God. There is an enemy; let him be drawn to God. Draw, draw
   on thine enemy; by drawing him on he shall cease to be thine enemy. So
   let charity be advanced, so be it nourished, that being nourished it
   may be perfected; so be "the wedding garment" put on; so be the image
   of God, after which we were created, by this our advancing, engraven
   anew in us. For by sin was it bruised, and worn away. How is it
   bruised? how worn away? When it is rubbed against the earth? And what
   is, "When it is rubbed against the earth"? When it is worn by earthly
   lusts. For "though man [3034] walketh in this image, yet is he
   disquieted in vain." [3035] Truth is looked for in God's image, not
   vanity. By the love of the truth then be that image, after which we
   were created, engraven anew, and His Own tribute rendered to our Cæsar.
   For so ye have heard from the Lord's answer, when the Jews tempted Him,
   as He said, "Why tempt ye Me, ye hypocrites; show Me the tribute
   money," [3036] that is, the impress and superscription of the image.
   Show me what ye pay, what ye get ready, what is exacted of you. And
   "they showed Him a denarius;" and "He asked whose image and
   superscription it had." They answered, "Cæsar's." So Cæsar looks for
   his own image. It is not Cæsar's will that what he ordered to be made
   should be lost to him, and it is not surely God's will that what He
   hath made should be lost to Him. Cæsar, my Brethren, did not make the
   money; the masters of the mint [3037] make it; the workmen have their
   orders, he issues his commands to his ministers. His image was stamped
   upon the money; on the money was Cæsar's image. And yet he requires
   what others have stamped; he puts it in his treasures; he will not have
   it refused him. Christ's coin is man. In him is Christ's image, in him
   Christ's Name, Christ's gifts, Christ's rules of duty. [3038]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [2985] The great Church in Carthage where the bodies of the Martyr Sts.
   Perpetua and Felicitas lay. See Ben. ed. in Sermon xix. note.

   [2986] Baptized fideles.

   [2987] Apparatus.

   [2988] Voluntati omnium.

   [2989] 1 Cor. xi. 29.

   [2990] Liquido.

   [2991] Matt. xix. 17.

   [2992] Matt. vii. 11.

   [2993] John xiii. 10.

   [2994] Matt. xxii. 10.

   [2995] 1 John i. 8.

   [2996] 1 John i. 9.

   [2997] Serm. xlv. (xcv. Ben.) 6.

   [2998] Matt. xxii. 11.

   [2999] Matt. xxii. 12.

   [3000] Ps. cxxxii. 9.

   [3001] See note, Serm. viii. (lviii. Ben.) 13 (xi.).

   [3002] 2 Cor. v. 3.

   [3003] Matt. xxii. 13.

   [3004] Matt. xxii. 14.

   [3005] Matt. viii. 11.

   [3006] Exod. vii.

   [3007] 1 Cor. xii. 29, etc.

   [3008] 1 Tim. i. 5.

   [3009] 1 Cor. xiii. 1.

   [3010] Sacramentorum.

   [3011] 1 Cor. xiii. 3.

   [3012] 1 John i. 8.

   [3013] Phil. ii. 21.

   [3014] Deferte.

   [3015] Ps. x. 5, Sept. (xi. 5, English version).

   [3016] Aurata.

   [3017] 1 Cor. xv. 22.

   [3018] Jas. ii. 19.

   [3019] Matt. xvi. 16.

   [3020] Matt. viii. 29; Mark i. 24.

   [3021] Matt. xxvi. 35.

   [3022] Gal. v. 6.

   [3023] Ps. liii. 1.

   [3024] Luke xxiii. 34.

   [3025] Acts vii. 51, 52.

   [3026] Adhuc.

   [3027] Acts vii. 59.

   [3028] Acts vii. 60.

   [3029] Luke xxiii. 34.

   [3030] Zabulo; Lactant. De Mort. Pers. 16.

   [3031] Grata.

   [3032] 2 Cor. xii. 14.

   [3033] Vid. Serm. xxxvi. (lxxxvi. Ben.) 11 (ix., x.).

   [3034] Serm. x. (lx. Ben.) 2, etc.

   [3035] Ps. xxxviii. 7, Sept. (xxxix. 6 English version).

   [3036] Matt. xxii. 18, 19.

   [3037] Monetarii.

   [3038] Officia.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLI.

   [XCI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xxii. 42, where the Lord asks the
   Jews whose son they said David was.

   1. When the Jews were asked (as we have just now heard out of the
   Gospel when it was being read), how our Lord Jesus Christ, whom David
   himself called his Lord was David's Son, they were not able to answer.
   For what they saw in the Lord, that they knew. For He appeared to them
   as the Son of man; but as the Son of God He was hidden. Hence it was,
   that they believed that He could be overcome, and that they derided Him
   as He hung upon the Tree, saying, "If He be the Son of God, let Him
   come down from the Cross, and we will believe on Him." [3039] They saw
   one part of what He was, they knew not the other, "For had they known
   Him, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory." [3040] Yet they
   knew that the Christ was to be the Son of David. For even now they hope
   that He will come. They know not that He is come already, but this
   their ignorance is voluntary. For even if they did not acknowledge Him
   on the tree, they ought not to have failed to acknowledge Him on His
   Throne. For in whose Name are all nations called and blessed, but in
   His whom they think not to have been the Christ? For this Son of David,
   that is, "of the seed of David according to the flesh," is the Son of
   Abraham. Now if it was said to Abraham, "In thy seed shall all nations
   be blessed;" [3041] and they see now that in our Christ are all nations
   blessed, why wait they for what is already come, and fear not that
   which is yet to come? for our Lord Jesus Christ, making use of a
   prophetic testimony to assert His authority, called Himself "the
   Stone." Yea such a stone, "that whosoever shall stumble against it
   shall be shaken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to
   powder." [3042] For when this stone is stumbled against, it lieth low;
   by lying low, it "shaketh" him that stumbleth against it; being lifted
   on high, by its coming down it "grindeth" the proud "to powder."
   Already therefore are the Jews "shaken" by that stumbling; it yet
   remains that by His Glorious Advent they should be "ground to powder"
   also, unless peradventure whilst they are yet alive, they acknowledge
   Him that they die not. For God is patient, and inviteth them day by day
   to the Faith.

   2. But when the Jews could not answer the Lord proposing a question,
   and asking "whose Son they said Christ was;" and they answered, "the
   Son of David;" [3043] He goes on with the further question put to them,
   "How then doth David in spirit call Him Lord, saying, The Lord said
   unto my Lord, Sit thou on My right hand till I make Thine enemies My
   footstool. If David then," He saith, "in spirit call Him Lord, how is
   He his Son?" [3044] He did not say, "He is not his Son, but how is He
   his son?" When he saith "How," it is a word not of negation, but of
   enquiry; as though He should say to them, "Ye say well indeed that
   Christ is David's Son, but David himself doth call Him Lord; whom he
   then calleth Lord, how is He his Son?" Had the Jews been instructed in
   the Christian faith, which we hold; had they not closed their hearts
   against the Gospel, had they wished to have spiritual life in them,
   they would, as instructed in the faith of the Church, have made answer
   to this question and said, "Because in the beginning was the Word, and
   the Word was with God and the Word was God:" [3045] see how He is
   David's Lord. But because "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among
   us;" [3046] see how He is David's Son. But as being ignorant, they were
   silent, nor when they shut their mouths did they open their ears, that
   what they could not answer when questioned, they might after
   instruction know.

   3. But seeing that is a great thing to know the mystery how He is
   David's Son and David's Lord: how one Person is both Man and God; how
   in the form of Man He is less than the Father, in the form of God equal
   with the Father; how again He saith, on the one hand, "The Father is
   greater than I;" [3047] and on the other, "I and My Father are one;"
   [3048] seeing this is a great mystery, [3049] our conduct must be
   fashioned, that it may be comprehended. For to the unworthy is it
   closed up, it is opened to those who are meet for it. It is not with
   stones, or clubs, or the fist, or the heel, that we knock unto the
   Lord. It is the life which knocks, it is to the life that it is opened.
   The seeking is with the heart, the asking is with the heart, the
   knocking is with the heart, the opening is to the heart. Now that heart
   which asks rightly, and knocks and seeks rightly, must be godly. Must
   first love God for His Own sake (for this is godliness); and not
   propose to itself any reward which it looks for from Him other than God
   Himself. For than Him is there nothing better. And what precious thing
   can he ask of God, in whose sight God Himself is lightly esteemed? He
   giveth earth, and thou rejoicest, thou lover of the earth, who art
   thyself become earth. If when He giveth earthly goods, thou dost
   rejoice, how much more oughtest thou to rejoice when He giveth thee
   Himself, who made heaven and earth? So then God must be loved for His
   own sake. For the Devil not knowing what was passing in the heart of
   holy Job, brought this as a great charge against him, saying, "Doth Job
   worship God for His Own sake." [3050]

   4. So then if the adversary brought this charge, we ought to fear lest
   it be brought against us. For with a very slanderous accuser have we to
   deal. If he seek to invent what is not, how much more will he seek to
   object what really is. Nevertheless let us rejoice, that ours is such a
   Judge, as cannot be deceived by our accuser. For if we had a man for
   our judge, the enemy might invent for him what he would. For none is
   more subtle in invention than the devil. For he it is who at this time
   also invents all false accusations against the saints. He knows his
   accusations can have no avail with God, and so He scatters them among
   men. Yet what does this profit him, seeing the Apostle says, "Our
   glorying is this, the testimony of our conscience?" [3051] Yet think ye
   that he does not invent these false charges with aught of subtlety?
   Yes, well he knows what evil he shall work thereby, if the watchfulness
   of faith resist him not. For for this reason scatters he his evil
   charges against the good, that the weak may think that there are no
   good, and so may give themselves up to be hurried along, and made a
   prey of by their lusts, whilst they say within themselves, "For who is
   there that keeps the commandments of God, or who is there that
   preserves chastity?" and whilst he thinks that no one does, he himself
   becomes that no one. This then is the devil's art. But such a man was
   Job, that he could not invent any such charge against him; for his life
   was too well known and manifest. But because he had great riches, he
   brought that against him, which if it had any existence, might lie in
   the heart, and not appear in the conduct. He worshipped God, he gave
   alms; and with what heart he did this none knew, no not the Devil
   himself; but God had known. God giveth His testimony to His own
   servant; the Devil calumniates the servant of God. He is allowed to be
   tried, Job is proved, the Devil is confounded. Job is found to worship
   God for His Own sake, to love Him for His Own sake; not because He gave
   him ought, but because He did not take away Himself. For he said, "The
   Lord gave, the Lord hath taken away; as it seemed good to the Lord, so
   is it done, blessed be the Name of the Lord." [3052] The fire of
   temptation approached him; but it found him gold, not stubble; it
   cleared away the dross from it, but did not reduce it to ashes.

   5. Because then, in order to understand the mystery [3053] of God, how
   Christ is both man and God, the heart must be cleansed: and it is
   cleansed by a good conversation, by a pure life, [3054] by chastity,
   and sanctity, and love, and by "faith, which worketh by love" [3055]
   (now all this that I am speaking of, is, as it were, the tree which
   hath its root in the heart; for it is only from the root of the heart
   that actions proceed; in which if thou plant desire, thorns spring
   forth; if thou plant charity, good fruit): the Lord, after that
   question which He had proposed to the Jews, when they were not able to
   answer it, immediately went on to speak of good actions, that He might
   show why they were unworthy to understand what He asked them. For when
   those proud and wretched men were not able to answer, they ought of
   course to have said, "we do not know; Master, tell us." But no: they
   were speechless at the proposing of the question, and they opened not
   their mouth to seek instruction. And so the Lord in reference to their
   pride said immediately, "Beware of the Scribes which love the chief
   seats in the synagogues, and the first rooms at feasts." [3056] Not
   because they hold them, but because they love them. For in these words
   he accused their heart. Now none can accuse the heart, but He who can
   inspect it. For meet it is that to the servant of God, who holds some
   post of honour in the Church, the first place should be assigned;
   because if it were not given him, it were evil for him who refuses to
   give it; but yet it is no good to him to whom it is given. It is meet
   and right then that in the congregation of Christians their Prelates
   [3057] should sit in eminent place, that by their very seat they may be
   distinguished, and that their office may be duly marked; yet not so
   that they should be puffed up for their seat; but that they should
   esteem it a burden, for which they are to render an account. But who
   knows whether they love this, or do not love it? This is a matter of
   the heart, it can have no other judge but God. Now the Lord Himself
   warned His disciples, that they should not fall into this leaven; as He
   calls it in another place, "Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees
   and of the Sadducees." [3058] And when they supposed that He said this
   to them because they had brought no bread; He answered them, "Have ye
   forgotten how many thousands were filled with the five loaves? Then
   understood they," it is said, "that He called their doctrine leaven."
   [3059] For these present temporal good things they loved, but they
   neither feared the evil things eternal, nor loved the good things
   eternal. And so their hearts being closed, they could not understand
   what the Lord asked them.

   6. But what then has the Church of God to do, that it may be able to
   understand what it has first obtained [3060] grace to believe? It must
   make the mind capacious for receiving what shall be given it. And that
   this may be done, that the mind, that is, may be capacious, our Lord
   God suspends His promises, He has not taken them away. Therefore does
   He suspend them, that we may stretch out ourselves; and therefore do we
   stretch ourselves out, that we may grow; and therefore do we grow, that
   we may reach them. Behold the Apostle Paul stretching himself out unto
   these suspended promises: "Not as though I had already attained, either
   were already perfect. Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended:
   but this one thing I do; forgetting those things which are behind, and
   stretching forth unto those things which are before, I press earnestly
   toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
   Jesus." [3061] He was running on the earth; the prize hung suspended
   from heaven. He ran then on the earth; but in spirit he ascended.
   Behold him thus stretching himself out, behold him hanging forth after
   the suspended prize. "I press on," he says, "for the prize of the high
   calling of God in Christ Jesus."

   7. We must journey on then, yet for this no need of anointing the feet,
   or looking out for beasts, or providing a vessel. Run with the heart's
   affection, journey on with love, ascend by charity. Why seekest thou
   for the way? Cleave unto Christ, who by Descending and Ascending hath
   made Himself the Way. Dost thou wish to ascend? Hold fast to Him that
   ascendeth. For by thine own self thou canst not rise. "For no man hath
   ascended up to heaven, but He that came down from heaven, even the Son
   of Man which is in heaven." [3062] If no one ascendeth but He that
   descended, that is, the Son of Man, our Lord Jesus, dost thou wish to
   ascend also? Be then a member of Him who Only hath ascended. For He the
   Head, with all the members, is but One Man. And since no one can
   ascend, but he who in His Body is made a member of Him; that is
   fulfilled, "that no man hath ascended, but He that descended." For thou
   canst not say, "Lo, why hath Peter, for instance, ascended, why hath
   Paul ascended, why have the Apostles ascended, if no one hath ascended,
   but He that descended?" The answer to this is, "What do Peter, and
   Paul, and the rest of the Apostles, and all the faithful, what do they
   hear from the Apostle? Now ye are the Body of Christ, and members in
   particular.' [3063] If then the Body of Christ and His members belong
   to One, do not thou make two of them. For He left father and mother,
   and clave to his wife, that two might be one flesh.' [3064] He left His
   Father, in that here He did not show Himself as equal with the Father;
   but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant.' [3065] He left His
   mother also, the synagogue of which He was born after the flesh. He
   clave to His Wife, that is, to His Church. Now in the place where
   Christ Himself brought forward this testimony, He showed that the
   marriage bond might not be dissolved: Have ye not read,' said He, that
   God which made them at the beginning, made them male and female; and
   said, They twain shall be in one flesh? What therefore God hath joined
   together, let not man put asunder.' [3066] And what is the meaning of
   They twain shall be in one flesh'? He goes on to say; Wherefore they
   are no more twain but one flesh.' Thus no man hath ascended, but He
   that descended.'" [3067]

   8. For that ye may know, that the Bridegroom and the Bride are One
   according to the Flesh of Christ, not according to His Divinity (for
   according to His Divinity we cannot be what He is; seeing that He is
   the Creator, we the creature; He the Maker, we His work; He the Framer,
   we framed by Him; but in order that we might be one with Him in Him, He
   vouchsafed to be our Head, by taking of us flesh wherein to die for
   us); that ye may know then that this whole is One Christ, He said by
   Isaiah, "He hath bound a mitre on me as a bridegroom, and clothed me
   with ornaments as a bride." [3068] He is then at once the Bridegroom
   and the Bride. That is, the Bridegroom in Himself as the Head, the
   Bride in the body. "For they twain," saith He, "shall be in one flesh;
   so now they are no more twain, but one flesh."

   9. Seeing then that we are of His members, in order that we may
   understand this mystery as I have said, Brethren, let us live holily,
   let us love God for His Own sake. Now He who showeth to us while in our
   pilgrimage the form of a servant, reserveth for those that reach their
   country the form of God. With the form of a servant hath He laid down
   the way, with the form of God He hath prepared the home. Seeing then
   that it is a hard matter for us to comprehend this, but no hard matter
   to believe it; for Isaiah says, "Unless ye believe ye shall not
   understand;" [3069] let us "walk by faith as long as we are in
   pilgrimage from the Lord, till we come to sight where we shall see face
   to face." [3070] As walking by faith, let us do good works. In these
   good works, let there be a free love of God for His Own sake, and an
   active [3071] love of our neighbour. For we have nothing we can do for
   God; but because we have something we may do for our neighbour, we
   shall by our good offices to the needy, gain His favour who is the
   source of all abundance. [3072] Let every one then do what he can for
   others; let him freely bestow upon the needy of his superfluity. One
   has money; let him feed the poor, let him clothe the naked, let him
   build a church, let him do with his money all the good he can. Another
   has good counsel; let him guide his neighbour, let him by the light of
   holiness drive away the darkness of doubting. Another has learning; let
   him draw out of this store of the Lord, let him minister food to his
   fellow-servants, strengthen the faithful, recall the wandering, seek
   the lost, do all the good he can. Something there is, which even the
   poor may deal out to one another; let one lend feet to the lame,
   another give his own eyes to guide the blind; another visit the sick,
   another bury the dead. These are things which all may do, so that in a
   word it would be hard to find one who has not some means of doing good
   to others. And last of all comes that important duty which the Apostle
   speaks of; "Bear ye one another's burdens, and so shall ye fulfil the
   law of Christ." [3073]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3039] Matt. xxvii. 42.

   [3040] 1 Cor. ii. 8.

   [3041] Gen. xxii. 18.

   [3042] Ps. cxviii. 22; Luke xx. 17, 18.

   [3043] Matt. xxii. 42.

   [3044] Matt. xxii. 43-45.

   [3045] John i. 1.

   [3046] John i. 14.

   [3047] John xiv. 28.

   [3048] John x. 30.

   [3049] Sacramentum.

   [3050] Job i. 9. Gratis.

   [3051] 2 Cor. i. 12.

   [3052] Job i. 21, Sept.

   [3053] Sacramentum.

   [3054] Vita.

   [3055] Gal. v. 6.

   [3056] Matt. xxiii. 6; Mark xii. 39.

   [3057] Prepositi plebis.

   [3058] Matt. xvi. 6.

   [3059] Matt. xvi. 9, 12.

   [3060] Meruit.

   [3061] Phil. iii. 12, etc.

   [3062] John iii. 13.

   [3063] 1 Cor. xii. 27.

   [3064] Eph. v. 31.

   [3065] Phil. ii. 7.

   [3066] Matt. xix. 4, etc.

   [3067] John iii. 13.

   [3068] Isa. lxi. 10, Sept.

   [3069] Isa. vii. 9, Sept.

   [3070] 2 Cor. v. 6, 7.

   [3071] Benefica.

   [3072] Promerebimur abundantem.

   [3073] Gal. vi. 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLII.

   [XCII. Ben.]

   On the same words of the Gospel, Matt. xxii. 42

   1. The question which was proposed to the Jews, Christians ought to
   solve. For the Lord Jesus Christ, who proposed it to the Jews, did not
   solve it Himself, to the Jews, I mean, He did not, but to us He hath
   solved it. I will put you in remembrance, Beloved, and ye will find
   that He hath solved it. But first consider the knot of the question. He
   asked the Jews what they "thought of Christ, whose Son He was to be;"
   for they too look for the Christ. They read of Him in the Prophets,
   they expected Him to come, when He was come they killed Him; for where
   they read that Christ would come, there did they read that they should
   kill Christ. But His future coming they hoped for in the Prophets; for
   they did not see their future crime. He therefore so questioned them
   about the Christ, not as if about One who was unknown to them, or whose
   Name they had never heard, or whose coming they had never hoped for.
   For they err in that even yet they hope for Him. And we indeed hope for
   Him too; but we hope for Him as One who is to come as Judge, not to be
   judged. For the Holy Prophets prophesied both, that He should come
   first to be judged unrighteously, that He should come afterwards to
   judge with righteousness. "What think ye," then, saith he, "of Christ?
   whose Son is He? They answered Him, The Son of David." [3074] And this
   was entirely according to the Scriptures. But He said, "How then doth
   David in spirit call Him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto My Lord, Sit
   Thou on My right hand, till I make Thine enemies Thy footstool. If
   David then in spirit call Him Lord, how is He his Son?" [3075]

   2. Here then is need of a caution, lest Christ be thought to have
   denied that He was the Son of David. He did not deny that He was the
   Son of David, but He enquired the way. "Ye have said that Christ is the
   Son of David, I do not deny it; but David calls Him Lord; tell me how
   is He his Son, who is also his Lord; tell me how?" They did not tell
   Him, but were silent. Let us then tell by the explanation of Christ
   Himself. Where? By His Apostle. But first, whereby do we prove that
   Christ hath Himself explained it? The Apostle says, "Would ye receive a
   proof of Christ who speaketh in me?" [3076] So then in the Apostle hath
   He vouchsafed to solve this question. In the first place, what said
   Christ speaking by the Apostle to Timothy? "Remember that Jesus Christ
   of the seed of David was raised from the dead according to my Gospel."
   [3077] See, Christ is the Son of David. How is He also David's Lord?
   Tell us, O Apostle: "who being in the form of God, thought it not
   robbery to be equal with God." Acknowledge David's Lord. If thou
   acknowledge David's Lord, our Lord, the Lord of heaven and earth, the
   Lord of the Angels, equal with God, in the form of God, how is He
   David's Son? Mark what follows. The Apostle shows thee David's Lord by
   saying, "Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be
   equal with God." And how is He David's Son? "But He emptied Himself,
   taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men; and
   being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, having become
   obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also
   hath highly exalted Him." [3078] Christ "of the seed of David," the Son
   of David, rose again because "He emptied Himself." How did He "empty
   Himself"? By taking that which He was not, not by losing that which He
   was. He "emptied Himself," He "humbled himself." Though He was God, He
   appeared as man. He was despised as He walked on earth, He who made the
   heaven. He was despised as though a mere man, as though of no power.
   Yea, not despised only, but slain moreover. He was that stone that lay
   on the ground, the Jews stumbled against it, and were shaken. And what
   doth He Himself say? "Whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be
   shaken, but on whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder."
   [3079] First, He lay low, and they stumbled against Him; He shall come
   from above, and He will "grind" them that have been shaken "to powder."

   3. Thus have ye heard that Christ is both David's Son, and David's
   Lord: David's Lord always, David's Son in time: David's Lord, born of
   the substance of His Father, David's Son, born of the Virgin Mary,
   conceived by the Holy Ghost. Let us hold fast both. The one of them
   will be our eternal habitation, the other is our deliverance from our
   present exile. For unless our Lord Jesus Christ had vouchsafed to
   become man, man had perished. He was made that which He made, that what
   He made might not perish. Very Man, Very God; God and man whole Christ.
   This is the Catholic faith. Whoso denieth that Christ is God is a
   Photinian; [3080] whoso denieth that Christ is man is a Manichæan.
   [3081] Whoso confesseth that Christ is God equal with the Father and
   very man, that He truly suffered, truly shed His blood (for the Truth
   would not have set us free, if He had given a false price for us);
   whoso confesseth both, is a Catholic. He hath the country, he hath the
   way. He hath the country, "In the beginning was the Word;" [3082] He
   hath the country, "Being in the form of God, He thought it not robbery
   to be equal with God." [3083] He hath the way, "The Word was made
   flesh;" [3084] He hath the way, "He emptied Himself, taking the form of
   a servant." [3085] He is the home whither we are going, He is the way
   whereby we go. Let us by Him go unto Him, and we shall not go astray.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3074] Matt. xxii. 42.

   [3075] Matt. xxii. 43-45.

   [3076] 2 Cor. xiii. 3.

   [3077] 2 Tim. ii. 8.

   [3078] Phil. ii. 6, etc.

   [3079] Matt. xxi. 44.

   [3080] Vinc. Lirinens. Commonit. xii.; Conf. vii. 26 (xx.), Oxf.
   transl, and note f.

   [3081] Conf. v. 16 (ix.), 20 (x.), 25 (xix.), vii. 25 (xix.), Oxf.
   trans. and note A, p. 325. De Dono Perseverant, c. 67 (xxiv.), Serm.
   lxvi. (cxvi. Ben.) 1-5 (i.-iv.), Epist. 236 (al. 74) 2.

   [3082] John i. 1.

   [3083] Phil. ii. 6.

   [3084] John i. 14.

   [3085] Phil. ii. 7.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLIII.

   [XCIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xxv. 1, "then shall the kingdom of
   heaven be likened unto ten virgins."

   1. Ye who were present yesterday remember my promise; which with the
   Lord's assistance is to be made good to-day, not to you only, but to
   the many others also who have come together. It is no easy question,
   who the ten virgins are, of whom five are wise, and five foolish.
   Nevertheless, according to the context of this passage which I have
   wished should be read again to you to-day, Beloved, I do not think, as
   far as the Lord vouchsafes to give me understanding, that this parable
   or similitude relates to those women only who by a peculiar and more
   excellent sanctity are called Virgins in the Church, whom by a more
   usual term we are wont also to call, "The Religious;" [3086] but if I
   mistake not this parable relates to the whole Church. [3087] But though
   we should understand it of those only who are called "the Religious,"
   are they but ten? God forbid that so great a company of virgins should
   be reduced to so small a number! But perhaps one may say, "But what if
   though they be so many in outward profession, yet in truth they are so
   few, that scarce ten can be found!" It is not so. For if he had meant
   that the good virgins only should be understood by the ten, He would
   not have represented five foolish ones among them. For if this is the
   number of the virgins which are called, why are the doors of the great
   house shut against five?

   2. So then let us understand, dearly Beloved, that this parable relates
   to us all, that is, to the whole Church together, not to the Clergy
   [3088] only of whom we spoke yesterday; nor to the laity only; but
   generally to all. Why then are the Virgins five and five? These five
   and five virgins are all Christian souls together. But that I may tell
   you what by the Lord's inspiration I think, it is not souls of every
   sort, but such souls as have the Catholic faith, and seem to have good
   works in the Church of God; and yet even of them, "five are wise, and
   five are foolish." First then let us see why they are called "five,"
   and why "virgins," and then let us consider the rest. Every soul in the
   body is therefore denoted [3089] by the number five, because it makes
   use of five senses. For there is nothing of which we have perception by
   the body, but by the five folded gate, either by the sight, or the
   hearing, or the smelling, or the tasting, or the touching. Whoso then
   abstaineth from unlawful seeing, unlawful hearing, unlawful smelling,
   unlawful tasting, and unlawful touching, by reason of his uncorruptness
   [3090] hath gotten the name of virgin.

   3. But if it be good to abstain from the unlawful excitements of the
   senses, and on that account every Christian soul has gotten the name of
   virgin; why are five admitted and five rejected? They are both virgins,
   and yet are rejected. It is not enough that they are virgins; and that
   they have lamps. They are virgins, by reason of abstinence from
   unlawful indulgence of the senses; they have lamps, by reason of good
   works. Of which good works the Lord saith, "Let your works shine before
   men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
   is in heaven." [3091] Again He saith to His disciples, "Let your loins
   be girded and your lamps burning." [3092] In the "girded loins" is
   virginity; in the "burning lamps" good works.

   4. The title of virginity is not usually applied to married persons:
   yet even in them there is a virginity of faith, which produces wedded
   chastity. For that you may know, Holy Brethren, that every one, every
   soul, as touching the soul, and that uncorruptness of faith by which
   abstinence from things unlawful is practised, and by which good works
   are done, is not unsuitably called "a virgin;" the whole Church which
   consists of virgins, and boys, and married men and married women, is by
   one name called a Virgin. Whence prove we this? Hear the Apostle
   saying, not to the religious women only but to the whole Church
   together; "I have espoused you to One Husband, that I may present you
   as a chaste virgin to Christ." [3093] And because the devil, the
   corrupter of this virginity, is to be guarded against, after the
   Apostle had said, "I have espoused you to one husband, that I may
   present you as a chaste virgin to Christ;" he subjoined, "But I fear,
   lest as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds
   should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ." [3094] Few
   have virginity in the body; in the heart all ought to have it. If then
   abstinence from what is unlawful be good, whereby it has received the
   name of virginity, and good works are praiseworthy, which are signified
   by the lamps; why are five admitted and five rejected? If there be a
   virgin, and one who carries lamps, who yet is not admitted; where shall
   he see himself, who neither preserveth a virginity from things
   unlawful, and who not wishing to have good works walketh in darkness?

   5. Of these then, my Brethren, yea, of these let us the rather treat.
   He who will not see what is evil, he who will not hear what is evil, he
   that turneth away his smell from the unlawful fumes, and his taste from
   the unlawful food of the sacrifices, he who refuseth the embrace of
   another man's wife, breaketh his bread to the hungry, bringeth the
   stranger into his house, clotheth the naked, reconcileth the litigious,
   visiteth the sick, burieth the dead; he surely is a virgin, surely he
   hath lamps. What seek we more? Something yet I seek. What seekest thou
   yet, one will say? Something yet I seek; the Holy Gospel hath set me on
   the search. It hath said that even of these, virgins, and carrying
   lamps, some are wise and some foolish. By what do we see this? By what
   make the distinction? By the oil. Some great, some exceedingly great
   thing doth this oil signify. Thinkest thou that it is not charity? This
   we say as searching out what it is; we hazard no precipitate judgment.
   I will tell you why charity seems to be signified by the oil. The
   Apostle says, "I show unto you a way above the rest." [3095] Though I
   speak with the tongues of men and of Angels, and have not charity, I am
   become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal." [3096] This, that is
   "charity," is "that way above the rest," which is with good reason
   signified by the oil. For oil swims above all liquids. Pour in water,
   and pour in oil upon it, the oil will swim above. Pour in oil, pour in
   water upon it, the oil will swim above. If you keep the usual order, it
   will be uppermost; [3097] if you change the order, it will be
   uppermost. "Charity never falleth." [3098]

   6. What is it then, Brethren? Let us treat now of the five wise and the
   five foolish virgins. They wished to go to meet the Bridegroom. What is
   the meaning of "to go and meet the Bridegroom"? To go with the heart,
   to be waiting for his coming. But he tarried. "While he tarries, they
   all slept." What is "all"? Both the foolish and the wise, "all
   slumbered and slept." Think we is this sleep good? What is this sleep?
   Is it that at the tarrying of the Bridegroom, "because iniquity
   aboundeth, the love of many waxeth cold"? Are we to understand this
   sleep so? I like it not. I will tell you why. Because among them are
   the wise virgins; and certainly when the Lord said, "Because iniquity
   shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold;" He went on to say, "But
   he that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved." [3099]
   Where would ye have those wise virgins be? Are they not among those
   that "shall endure unto the end"? They would not be admitted within at
   all, Brethren, for any other reason, than because they have "endured
   unto the end." No coldness of love then crept over them, in them love
   did not wax cold; but preserves its glow even unto the end. And because
   it glows even unto the end, therefore are the gates of the Bridegroom
   opened to them; therefore are they told to enter in, as that excellent
   servant, "Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." [3100] What then is the
   meaning of they "all slept"? [3101] There is another sleep which no one
   escapes. Remember ye not the Apostle saying, "But I would not have you
   to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep," [3102]
   that is, concerning them which are dead? For why are they called "they
   which are asleep," but because they are in their own day? Therefore
   "they all slept." Thinkest thou that because one is wise, he has not
   therefore to die? Be the virgin foolish, or be she wise, all suffer
   equally the sleep of death.

   7. But men continually say to themselves, "Lo, the day of judgment is
   coming now, so many evils are happening, so many tribulations thicken;
   behold all things which the Prophets have spoken, are well-nigh
   fulfilled; the day of judgment is already at hand." They who speak
   thus, and speak in faith, go out as it were with such thoughts to "meet
   the Bridegroom." But, lo! war upon war, tribulation upon tribulation,
   earthquake upon earthquake, famine upon famine, nation against nation,
   and still the Bridegroom comes not yet. Whilst then He is expected to
   come, all they who are saying, "Lo, He is coming, and the Day of
   Judgment will find us here," fall asleep. Whilst they are saying this,
   they fall asleep. Let each one then have an eye to this his sleep, and
   persevere even unto his sleep in love; let sleep find him so waiting.
   For suppose that he has fallen asleep. "Will not He who falls asleep
   afterwards rise again?" [3103] Therefore "they all slept;" both of the
   wise and the foolish virgins in the parable, it is said, "they all
   slept."

   8. "Lo, at midnight there was a cry made." [3104] What is, "at
   midnight"? When there is no expectation, no belief at all of it. Night
   is put for ignorance. A man makes as it were a calculation with
   himself: "Lo, so many years have passed since Adam, and the six
   thousand years are being completed, and then immediately according to
   the computation of certain expositors, the Day of Judgment will come;"
   yet these calculations come and pass away, and still the coming of the
   Bridegroom is delayed, and the virgins who had gone to meet him sleep.
   And, lo, when He is not looked for, when men are saying, "The six
   thousand years were waited for, and, lo, they are gone by, how then
   shall we know when He will come?" He will come at midnight. What is,
   "will come at midnight"? Will come when thou art not aware. Why will He
   come when thou art not aware of it? Hear the Lord Himself, "It is not
   for you to know the times or the seasons which the Lord hath put in His
   own power." [3105] "The day of the Lord," says the Apostle, "will come
   as a thief in the night." [3106] Therefore watch thou by night that
   thou be not surprised by the thief. For the sleep of death--will ye, or
   nill ye--it will come.

   9. "But when that cry was made at midnight." What cry was this, but
   that of which the Apostle says, "In the twinkling of an eye, at the
   last trump"? "For the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
   incorruptible, and we shall be changed"? [3107] And so when the cry was
   made at midnight, "Behold, the Bridegroom cometh;" what follows? "Then
   all those virgins arose." What is, "they" all arose? "The hour will
   come," said the Lord Himself, "when all that are in the graves shall
   hear His voice, and shall come forth." [3108] Therefore at the last
   trumpet they all arose. "Now those wise virgins had brought oil with
   them in their vessels; but the foolish brought no oil with them."
   [3109] What is the meaning of "brought no oil with them in their
   vessels"? What is "in their vessels"? In their hearts. Whence the
   Apostle says, "Our glorying is this, the testimony of our conscience."
   [3110] There is the oil, the precious oil; this oil is of the gift of
   God. Men can put oil into their vessels, but they cannot create the
   olive. See, I have oil; but didst thou create the oil? It is of the
   gift of God. Thou hast oil. Carry it with thee. What is "carry it with
   thee"? Have it within, there please thou God.

   10. For, lo, those "foolish virgins, who brought no oil with them,"
   wish to please men by that abstinence of theirs whereby they are called
   virgins, and by their good works, when they seem to carry lamps. And if
   they wish to please men, and on that account do all these praiseworthy
   works, they do not carry oil with them. Do you then carry it with thee,
   carry it within where God seeth; there carry the testimony of thy
   conscience. For he who walks to gain the testimony of another, does not
   carry oil with him. If thou abstain from things unlawful, and doest
   good works to be praised of men; there is no oil within. And so when
   men begin to leave off their praises, the lamps fail. Observe then,
   Beloved, before those virgins slept, it is not said that their lamps
   were extinguished. The lamps of the wise virgins burned with an inward
   oil, with the assurance of a good conscience, with an inner glory, with
   an inmost charity. Yet the lamps of the foolish virgins burned also.
   Why burnt they then? Because there was yet no want of the praises of
   men. But after that they arose, that is in the resurrection from the
   dead, they began to trim their lamps, that is, began to prepare to
   render unto God an account of their works. And because there is then no
   one to praise, every man is wholly employed in his own cause, there is
   no one then who is not thinking of himself, therefore were there none
   to sell them oil; so their lamps began to fail, and the foolish betook
   themselves to the five wise, "give us of your oil, for our lamps are
   going out." [3111] They sought for what they had been wont to seek for,
   to shine that is with others' oil, to walk after others' praises. "Give
   us of your oil, for our lamps are going out."

   11. But they say, "Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you, but
   go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for yourselves." [3112] This
   was not the answer of those who give advice, but of those who mock. And
   why mock they? Because they were wise, because wisdom was in them. For
   they were not wise by ought of their own; but that wisdom was in them,
   of which it is written in a certain book, she shall say to those that
   despised her, when they have fallen upon the evils which she threatened
   them; "I will laugh over your destruction." [3113] What wonder then is
   it, that the wise mock the foolish virgins? And what is this mocking?

   12. "Go ye to them that sell, and buy for yourselves:" [3114] ye who
   never were wont to live well, but because men praised you, who sold you
   oil. What means this, "sold you oil"? "Sold praises." Who sell praises,
   but flatterers? How much better had it been for you not to have
   acquiesced in flatterers, and to have carried oil within, and for a
   good conscience-sake to have done all good works; then might ye say,
   "The righteous shall correct me in mercy, and reprove me, but the oil
   of the sinner shall not fatten [3115] my head." [3116] Rather, he says,
   let the righteous correct me, let the righteous reprove me, let the
   righteous buffet me, let the righteous correct me, than the "oil of the
   sinner fatten mine head." What is the oil of the sinner, but the
   blandishments of the flatterer?

   13. "Go ye" then "to them that sell," this have ye been accustomed to
   do. But we will not give to you. Why? "Lest there be not enough for us
   and you." What is, "lest there be not enough"? This was not spoken in
   any lack of hope, but in a sober and godly humility. For though the
   good man have a good conscience; how knows he, how He may judge who is
   deceived by no one? He hath a good conscience, no sins conceived in the
   heart solicit [3117] him, yet, though his conscience be good, because
   of the daily sins of human life, he saith to God, "forgive us our
   debts;" seeing he hath done what comes next, "as we also forgive our
   debtors." [3118] He hath broken his bread to the hungry from the heart,
   from the heart hath clothed the naked; out of that inward oil he hath
   done good works, and yet in that judgment even his good conscience
   trembleth.

   14. See then what this, "Give us oil," is. They were told "Go ye rather
   to them that sell." In that ye have been used to live upon the praises
   of men, ye do not carry oil with you; but we can give you none; "lest
   there be not enough for us and you." For scarcely do we judge of
   ourselves, how much less can we judge of you? What is "scarcely do we
   judge of ourselves"? Because, "When the righteous King sitteth on the
   throne, who will glory that his heart is pure?" [3119] It may be thou
   dost not discover anything in thine own conscience; but He who seeth
   better, whose Divine glance penetrateth into deeper things, discovereth
   it may be something, He seeth it may be something, He discovereth
   something. How much better mayest thou say to Him, "Enter not into
   judgment with Thy servant"? [3120] Yea, how much better, "Forgive us
   our debts"? Because it shall be also said to thee because of those
   torches, because of those lamps; "I was hungry, and ye gave Me meat."
   What then? did not the foolish virgins do so too? Yea, but they did it
   not before Him. How then did they do it? As the Lord forbiddeth, who
   said, "Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before men to be
   seen of them, otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in
   heaven: and when ye pray, be not as the hypocrites, for they love to
   pray, standing in the streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I
   say unto you, they have received their reward." [3121] They have bought
   oil, they have given the price; they have bought it, they have not been
   defrauded of men's praises, they have sought men's praises, and have
   had them. These praises of men aid them not in the judgment day. But
   the other virgins, how have they done? "Let your works shine before
   men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
   is in heaven." [3122] He did not say, "may glorify you." For thou hast
   no oil of thine own self. Boast thyself and say, I have it; but from
   Him, "for what hast thou that thou hast not received?" [3123] So then
   in this way acted the one, and in that the other.

   15. Now it is no wonder, that "while they are going to buy," while they
   are seeking for persons by whom to be praised, and find none; while
   they are seeking for persons by whom to be comforted, and find none;
   that the door is opened, that "the Bridegroom cometh," [3124] and the
   Bride, the Church, glorified then with Christ, that the several members
   may be gathered together into their whole. "And they went in with Him
   into the marriage, and the door was shut." Then the foolish virgins
   came afterwards; but had they bought any oil, or found any from whom
   they might buy it? Therefore they found the doors shut; they began to
   knock, but too late.

   16. It is said, and it is true, and no deceiving saying, "Knock, and it
   shall be opened unto you;" [3125] but now when it is the time of mercy,
   not when it is the time of judgment. For these times cannot be
   confounded, since the Church sings to her Lord of "mercy and judgment."
   [3126] It is the time of mercy; repent. Canst thou repent in the time
   of judgment? Thou wilt be then as those virgins, against whom the door
   was shut. "Lord, Lord, open to us." What! did they not repent, that
   they had brought no oil with them? Yes, but what profiteth them their
   late repentance, when the true wisdom mocked them? Therefore "the door
   was shut." And what was said to them? "I know you not." Did not He know
   them, who knoweth all things? What then is, "I know you not?" [3127] I
   refuse, I reject you. In my art I do not acknowledge you, my art
   knoweth not vice; now this is a marvellous thing, it doth not know
   vice, and it judgeth vice. It doth not know it in the practice of it;
   it judgeth by reproving it. Thus then, "I know you not."

   17. The five wise virgins came, and "went in." How many are ye, my
   Brethren, in the profession of Christ's Name! let there be among you
   the five wise, but be not five such persons only. Let there be among
   you the five wise, belonging to this wisdom of the number five. For the
   hour will come, and come when we know not. It will come at midnight,
   Watch ye. Thus did the Gospel close; "Watch, for ye know neither the
   day nor the hour." [3128] But if we are all to sleep, how shall we
   watch? Watch with the heart, watch with faith, watch with hope, watch
   with charity, watch with good works; and then, when thou shalt sleep in
   thy body, the time will come that thou shalt rise. And when thou shalt
   have risen, make ready the lamps. Then shall they go out no more, then
   shall they be renewed [3129] with the inner oil of conscience; then
   shall that Bridegroom fold thee in His spiritual [3130] embrace, then
   shall He bring thee into His House where thou shall never sleep, where
   thy lamp can never be extinguished. But at present we are in labour,
   and our lamps flicker [3131] amid the winds and temptations of this
   life; but only let our flame burn strongly, that the wind of temptation
   may increase the fire, rather than put it out.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3086] Sancti moniales.

   [3087] Bing. Antiq. B, vii. c. iv. sect. 8.

   [3088] Præpositos.

   [3089] Censetur.

   [3090] Integritatem.

   [3091] Matt. v. 16.

   [3092] Luke xii. 35.

   [3093] 2 Cor. xi. 2.

   [3094] 2 Cor. xi. 3.

   [3095] Supereminentiorem. 1 Cor. xii. 31.

   [3096] 1 Cor. xiii. 1.

   [3097] Vincit.

   [3098] 1 Cor. xiii. 8. Cadit.

   [3099] Matt. xxiv. 12, 13.

   [3100] Matt. xxv. 21.

   [3101] Matt. xxv. 5.

   [3102] 1 Thess. iv. 13.

   [3103] Ps. xl. 9, Sept. (xli. 8, English version).

   [3104] Matt. xxv. 6.

   [3105] Acts i. 7.

   [3106] 1 Thess. v. 2.

   [3107] 1 Cor. xv. 52.

   [3108] John v. 28, 29.

   [3109] Matt. xxv. 4, 3.

   [3110] 2 Cor. i. 12.

   [3111] Matt. xxv. 8.

   [3112] Matt. xxv. 9.

   [3113] Prov. i. 26.

   [3114] Matt. xxv. 9.

   [3115] Impinguabit.

   [3116] Ps. cxl. 5, Sept. (cxli. English version).

   [3117] Titillant.

   [3118] Matt. vi. 12.

   [3119] Prov. xx. 8, 9, Sept.

   [3120] Ps. cxliii. 2.

   [3121] Matt. vi. 1, etc.

   [3122] Matt. v. 16.

   [3123] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

   [3124] Matt. xxv. 10.

   [3125] Matt. vii. 7.

   [3126] Ps. ci. 1.

   [3127] Matt. xxv. 12.

   [3128] Matt. xxv. 13.

   [3129] Vegetentur.

   [3130] Incorporeis.

   [3131] Fluctuant.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLIV.

   [XCIV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Matt. xxv. 24, etc., where the slothful
   servant who would not put out the talent he had received, is condemned.

   1. My lords, my brethren, and fellow bishops have deigned to visit us
   and gladden us by their presence; but I know not why they are unwilling
   to assist me, when wearied. I have said this to you, Beloved, in their
   hearing, that your hearing may in a manner intercede for me with them,
   that when I ask them they also may discourse unto you in their turn.
   Let them dispense what they have received, let them vouchsafe to work
   rather than excuse themselves. Be pleased, however, to hear from me,
   fatigued though I be and have difficulty in speaking, a few words only.
   For we have besides a record of God's mercies vouchsafed through a holy
   Martyr, which we must give willing audience to altogether. [3132] What
   is it then? what shall I say unto you? Ye have heard in the Gospel both
   the due recompense [3133] of the good servants, and the punishment of
   the bad. And the whole wickedness of that servant who was reprobate and
   severely condemned, was that he would not put out his money to use. He
   kept the entire sum he had received; but the Lord looked for profit
   from it. God is coveteous with regard to our salvation. If he who did
   not put out to use is so condemned, what must they look for who lose
   what they have received? We then are the dispensers, we put out, ye
   receive. We look for profit; do ye live well. For this is the profit in
   our dealings with you. But do not think that this office of putting out
   to use does not belong to you also. Ye cannot execute it indeed from
   this elevated seat, but ye can wherever ye chance to be. Wherever
   Christ is attacked, defend Him; answer murmurers, rebuke blasphemers,
   from their fellowship keep yourselves apart. So do ye put out to use,
   if ye make gain of any. Discharge our office in your own houses. A
   bishop is called from hence, because he superintends, because he takes
   care and attends to others. To every man then, if he is the head of his
   own house, ought the office of the Episcopate to belong, to take care
   how his household believe, that none of them fall into heresy, neither
   wife, nor son, nor daughter, nor even his slave, because he has been
   bought at so great a price. The Apostolic teaching has set the master
   over the slave, and put the slave under the master; [3134] nevertheless
   Christ gave the same price for both. Do not neglect then the least of
   those belonging to you, look after the salvation of all your household
   with all vigilance. This if ye do, ye put out to use; ye will not be
   slothful servants, ye will not have to fear so horrible a condemnation.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3132] Vid. Serm. xxix. (lxxix. Ben.).

   [3133] Meritum.

   [3134] Eph. vi. 5; Tit. ii. 9.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLV.

   [XCV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Mark viii. 5, etc., where the miracle of
   the seven loaves is related.

   1. In expounding to you the Holy Scriptures, I as it were break bread
   for you. Do ye in hunger receive it, and break [3135] forth with a
   fulness of phrase from the heart; and ye who are rich in your banquet,
   be not meagre in good works and deeds. What I deal out to you is not
   mine own. What ye eat, I eat; what ye live upon, I live upon. We have
   in heaven a common store-house; for from thence comes the Word of God.

   2. The "seven loaves" [3136] signify the seven-fold operation of the
   Holy Spirit; the "four thousand men," the Church established on the
   four Gospels; "the seven baskets of fragments," the perfection of the
   Church. For by this number very constantly is perfection figured. For
   whence is that which is said, "seven times in a day will I praise
   thee"? [3137] Does a man sin who does not praise the Lord so often?
   What then is "seven times will I praise," but "I will never cease from
   praise"? For he who says "seven times," signifies all time. Whence in
   this world there are continual revolutions of seven days. What then is
   "seven times in a day will I praise Thee," but what is said in another
   place, "His praise shall always be in my mouth"? [3138] With reference
   to this perfection, John writes to seven Churches. The Apocalypse is a
   book of St. John the Evangelist; and he writes "to seven Churches."
   [3139] Be ye hungered; [3140] own ye these baskets. For those fragments
   were not lost; but seeing that ye too belong to the Church, they have
   surely profited you. In that I explain this to you, I minister to
   Christ; and when ye hear peaceably, ye "sit down." [3141] I in my body
   sit, but in my heart I am standing, and ministering to you in anxiety;
   lest peradventure, not the food, but the vessel offend any of you. Ye
   know the feast of God, ye have often heard it, that it is for the
   heart, not for the belly.

   3. Of a truth four thousand men were filled by seven loaves; what is
   more wonderful than this! Yet even this were not enough, had not seven
   baskets also been filled with the fragments that remained. O great
   mysteries! they were works, and the works spake. If thou understand
   these doings, they are words. And ye too belong to the four thousand,
   because ye live under the fourfold Gospel. To this number the children
   and women did not belong. For so it is said, "And they that did eat
   were four thousand men, excepting women and children." [3142] As though
   the void of understanding, and the effeminate were without number. Yet
   let even these eat. Let them eat: it may be the children will grow, and
   will be children no more; it may be the effeminate will be amended, and
   become chaste. Let them eat; we dispense, we deal out to them. But who
   these are, God inspecteth His feast, and if they do not amend
   themselves, He who knew how to invite them thither, knoweth also how to
   separate them from the rest.

   4. Ye know it, dearly Beloved; call to mind the parable of the Gospel,
   how that the Lord came in to inspect the guests at a certain feast of
   His. The Master of the house who had invited them, as it is written,
   "found there a man which had not on a wedding garment." [3143] For to
   the marriage had that Bridegroom invited them who is "fair in beauty
   above the children of men." That Bridegroom became deformed because of
   His deformed spouse, that he might make her fair. How did the Fair One
   become deformed? If I do not prove it, I am blaspheming. The testimony
   of his fair beauty the Prophet gives me, who saith, "Thou art fair in
   beauty above the children of men." [3144] The testimony of his
   deformity another Prophet gives me, who saith, "We saw Him, and He had
   no grace, nor beauty; but His countenance was marred, and His whole
   look [3145] deformed." [3146] O Prophet, who saidst, "Thou art fair in
   beauty above the children of men;" thou art contradicted; another
   Prophet cometh out against thee, and saith, "Thou speakest falsely. We
   have seen Him. What is this that thou sayest, Thou art fair in beauty
   above the children of men? We have seen Him, and He had no grace nor
   beauty.'" Are then these two Prophets at disagreement in the
   Corner-stone of peace? Both spake of Christ, both spake of the
   Cornerstone. In the corner the walls unite. If they do not unite, it is
   not a building, but a ruin. No, the Prophets agree, let us not leave
   them in strife. Yea, rather let us understand their peace; for they
   know not how to strive. O Prophet, who saidst, "Thou art fair in beauty
   above the children of men;" where didst thou see Him? Answer me, answer
   where didst thou see Him? "Being in the form of God, He thought it not
   robbery to be equal with God." [3147] There I saw Him. Dost thou doubt
   that He who is "equal with God" is "fair in beauty above the children
   of men"? Thou hast answered; now let him answer who said, "We saw Him,
   and He had no grace, nor beauty." Thou hast said so; tell us where
   didst thou see Him? He begins from the other's words; where the other
   ended, there he begins. Where did he end? "Who being in the form of
   God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God." Lo, where he saw Him
   who was "fair in beauty above the children of men;" do thou tell us,
   where thou sawest that "He had no grace nor beauty. But He emptied
   Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of
   men, and found in fashion as a man." [3148] Of His deformity he still
   further says; "He humbled Himself, having become obedient unto death
   even the death of the cross." Lo, where I saw Him. Therefore are they
   both in peaceful concord, both are at peace together. What is more
   "fair" than God? What more "deformed" than the Crucified?

   5. So then this Bridegroom, "fair in beauty above the children of men,"
   became deformed that He might make His Spouse fair to whom it is said,
   "O thou beauteous among women," [3149] of whom it is said, "Who is this
   that cometh up, whitened" [3150] with the brightness of light, not the
   colouring of falsehood! He then who called them to the wedding, found a
   man who had not a wedding garment, and He said unto him, "Friend, how
   camest thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? And he was
   speechless." For he found not what to answer. And the Master of the
   house Who had invited him said, "Bind him hands and feet, and cast him
   into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."
   [3151] For so small a fault, so great a punishment? For great it is. It
   is called a small fault not to have "the wedding garment;" small, but
   only by those who do not understand. How would He have been so
   incensed, how would He have so judged, to cast him, on account of the
   wedding garment which he had not, "bound hands and feet into outer
   darkness, where was weeping and gnashing of teeth," unless it had been
   a very grievous fault, not to have "the wedding garment"? I say this;
   seeing ye have been invited through me; for though He invited you, He
   invited you by my ministry. Ye are all at the feast, have the wedding
   garment. I will explain what it is, that ye may all have it, and if any
   one now hears me who has it not, let him, before the Master of the
   house comes and inspects His guests, be changed for the better, let him
   receive "the wedding garment," and so sit down in all assurance.

   6. For in truth, dearly Beloved, he who was cast forth from the feast,
   does not signify one man; far from it. They are many. And the Lord
   Himself who put forth this parable, the Bridegroom Himself, who calleth
   together to the feast, and quickeneth whom He calleth, He hath Himself
   explained to us, that that man does not denote one man, but many,
   there, in that very place, in the same parable. I do not go far for
   this, I find the explanation there, there I break the bread, and set it
   before you to be eaten. For He said, when he who had not "the wedding
   garment was cast out thence into outer darkness," He said and added
   immediately, "for many are called, but few chosen." [3152] Thou hast
   cast forth one man from hence, and Thou sayest, "for many are called,
   but few chosen." Without doubt the chosen are not cast forth; and they
   were the few guests who remained; and the "many" were represented in
   that one, because that one who hath not "the wedding garment" is the
   body of the wicked.

   7. What is "the wedding garment"? Let us search for it in the Holy
   Scriptures. What is "the wedding garment"? Without doubt it is
   something which the bad and good have not in common; let us discover
   this, and we shall discover "the wedding garment." Among the gifts of
   God, what have not the good and bad in common? [3153] That we are men
   and not beasts, is a gift of God; but this is common to good and bad.
   That the light from heaven rises upon us, that the rain descends from
   the cloud, the fountains flow, the fields yield their fruit; these are
   gifts, but common to the good and bad. Let us go to the marriage feast,
   let us leave the others without, who being called come not. Let us
   consider the guests themselves, that is, Christians. Baptism is a gift
   of God, the good and bad have it. The Sacraments of the Altar the good
   and bad receive together. Saul prophesied for all his wickedness, and
   in his rage against a holy and most righteous man, even while he was
   persecuting him, he prophesied. Are the good only said to believe? "The
   devils also believe and tremble." [3154] What shall I do? I have sifted
   all, and have not yet come to "the wedding garment." I have unfolded my
   envelopings, I have considered all, or almost all, and have not yet
   come to that garment. The Apostle Paul in a certain place has brought
   me a great collection [3155] of excellent things; he has laid them open
   before me, and I have said to him, "Show me, if so be thou hast found
   among them that wedding garment.'" He begins to unfold them one by one,
   and to say, "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of Angels,
   though I have all knowledge, and the gift of prophecy, and all faith,
   so that I could remove mountains; though I distribute all my goods to
   the poor, and give my body to be burned." [3156] Precious garments!
   nevertheless, there is not yet here that "wedding garment." Now bring
   out to us "the wedding garment." Why dost thou keep us in suspense, O
   Apostle? Peradventure prophecy is a gift of God which both good and bad
   have not. "If," says He, "I have not charity, nothing profiteth me."
   See "the wedding garment;" put it on, ye guests, that ye may sit down
   securely. Do not say; "we are too poor to have that garment." Clothe
   others, and ye are clothed yourselves. It is winter, clothe the naked.
   Christ is naked; and He will give you that "wedding garment" whosoever
   have it not. Run to Him, beseech Him; He knoweth how to sanctify His
   faithful ones, He knoweth how to clothe His naked ones. That ye may be
   able as having "the wedding garment" to be free from the fear of the
   outer darkness, and the binding of your members and hands and feet; let
   not your works fail. If they fail, with hands bound what canst thou do?
   with feet bound, whither wilt thou fly? Keep then that "wedding
   garment," put it on, and so sit down in security, when He comes to
   inspect. The Day of Judgment will come; He is now giving a long space,
   let him who erewhile was naked now be clothed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3135] Saginam laudis eructuate.

   [3136] Mark viii. 6.

   [3137] Ps. cxix. 164.

   [3138] Ps. xxxiv. 1.

   [3139] Rev. i. 4.

   [3140] Voraces, Edd. ant.; veraces, B from 1Ms. 2da manu.

   [3141] Mark viii. 6.

   [3142] Matt. xv. 38.

   [3143] Matt. xxii. 11.

   [3144] Ps. xliv. 3 (xlv. 2, English version).

   [3145] Positio.

   [3146] Isa. liii. 2, Sept.

   [3147] Phil. ii. 6.

   [3148] Phil. ii. 7, 8.

   [3149] Cant. i. 8.

   [3150] Cant. viii. 5, Sept. Dealbata, "not as women whiten themselves,
   who would appear what they are not; not as a whitened wall,--not thus
   whitened, but enlightened, because not of itself white.--Grace came
   illumining and whitening; first thou wert black, but hast been made
   white by His grace. For ye were darkness, but now are ye light in the
   Lord." St. Aug. In Ps. 103, s. 1, § 6.

   [3151] Matt. xxii. 12, etc.

   [3152] Matt. xxii. 14.

   [3153] Vid. Serm. xl. (xc. Ben.) 5, etc.

   [3154] Jas. ii. 19.

   [3155] Involucrum.

   [3156] 1 Cor. xiii. 1, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLVI.

   [XCVI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Mark viii. 34, "If any man would come after
   me, let him deny himself," etc. And on the words 1 John ii. 15, "if any
   man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him."

   1. Hard and grievous does that appear which the Lord hath enjoined,
   that "whosoever will come after Him, must deny himself." [3157] But
   what He enjoineth is not hard or grievous, who aideth us that what He
   enjoineth may be done. For both is that true which is said to Him in
   the Psalm, "Because of the words of Thy lips I have kept hard ways."
   [3158] And that is true which He said Himself, "My yoke is easy, and My
   burden is light." [3159] For whatsoever is hard in what is enjoined us,
   charity makes easy. We know what great things love itself can do. Very
   often is this love even abominable and impure; but how great hardships
   have men suffered, what indignities and intolerable things have they
   endured, to attain to the object of their love? whether it be a lover
   of money who is called covetous; or a lover of honour, who is called
   ambitious; or a lover of beautiful women, who is called voluptuous. And
   who could enumerate all sorts of loves? Yet consider what labour all
   lovers undergo, and are not conscious of their labours; and then does
   any such one most feel labour, when he is hindered from labour. Since
   then the majority of men are such as their loves are, and that there
   ought to be no other care for the regulation of our lives, than the
   choice of that which we ought to love; why dost thou wonder, if he who
   loves Christ, and who wishes to follow Christ, for the love of Him
   denies himself? For if by loving himself man is lost, surely by denying
   himself he is found.

   2. The first destruction of man, was the love of himself. For if he had
   not loved himself, if he had preferred God to himself, he would have
   been willing to be ever subject unto God; and would not have been
   turned to the neglect of His will, and the doing his own will. For this
   is to love one's self, to wish to do one's own will. Prefer to this
   God's will; learn to love thyself by not loving thyself. For that ye
   may know that it is a vice to love one's self, the Apostle speaks thus,
   "For men shall be lovers of their own selves." [3160] And can he who
   loves himself have any sure trust in himself? No; for he begins to love
   himself by forsaking God, and is driven away from himself to love those
   things which are beyond himself; to such a degree that when the
   aforesaid Apostle had said," Men shall be lovers of their own selves,"
   he subjoined immediately, "lovers of money." Already thou seest that
   thou art without. Thou hast begun to love thyself: stand in thyself if
   thou canst. Why goest thou without? Hast thou, as being rich in money,
   become a lover of money? Thou hast begun to love what is without thee,
   thou hast lost thyself. When a man's love then goes even away from
   himself to those things which are without, he begins to share the
   vanity of his vain desires, and prodigal as it were to spend his
   strength. He is dissipated, exhausted, without resource or strength, he
   feeds swine; and wearied with this office of feeding swine, he at last
   remembers what he was, and says, "How many hired servants of my
   Father's are eating bread, and I here perish with hunger!" [3161] But
   when the son in the parable says this, what is said of him, who had
   squandered all he had on harlots, who wished to have in his own power
   what was being well kept for him with his father; he wished to have it
   at his own disposal, he squandered all, he was reduced to indigence:
   what is said of him? "And when he returned to himself." If "he returned
   to himself," he had gone away from himself. Because he had fallen from
   himself, had gone away from himself, he returns first to himself, that
   he may return to that state from which he had fallen away by falling
   from himself. For as by falling away from himself, he remained in
   himself; so by returning to himself, he ought not to remain in himself,
   lest he again go away from himself. Returning then to himself, that he
   might not remain in himself, what did he say? "I will arise and go to
   my Father." [3162] See, whence he had fallen away from himself, he had
   fallen away from his Father; he had fallen away from himself, he had
   gone away from himself to those things which are without. He returns to
   himself, and goes to his Father, where he may keep himself in all
   security. If then he had gone away from himself, let him also in
   returning to himself, from whom he had gone away, that he may "go to
   his Father," deny himself. What is "deny himself"? Let him not trust in
   himself, let him feel that he is a man, and have respect to the words
   of the prophet, "Cursed is every one that putteth his hope in man."
   [3163] Let him withdraw himself from himself, but not towards things
   below. Let him withdraw himself from himself, that he may cleave unto
   God. Whatever of good he has, let him commit to Him by whom he was
   made; whatever of evil he has, he has made it for himself. The evil
   that is in him God made not; let him destroy what himself has done, who
   has been thereby undone. "Let him deny himself," He saith, "and take up
   his cross, and follow Me."

   3. And whither must the Lord be followed? Whither He is gone, we know;
   but a very few days since we celebrated the solemn memorial of it. For
   He has risen again, and ascended into heaven; thither must He be
   followed. Undoubtedly we must not despair of it, because He hath
   Himself promised us, not because man can do anything. Heaven was far
   away from us, before that our Head had gone into heaven. But now why
   should we despair, if we are members of that Head? Thither then must He
   be followed. And who would be unwilling to follow Him to such an abode?
   Especially seeing that we are in so great travail on earth with fears
   and pains. Who would be unwilling to follow Christ thither, where is
   supreme felicity, supreme peace, perpetual security? Good is it to
   follow Him thither: but we must see by what way we are to follow. For
   the Lord Jesus did not say the words we are engaged in, when He had now
   risen from the dead. He had not yet suffered, He had still to come to
   the Cross, had to come to His dishonouring, to the outrages, the
   scourging, the thorns, the wounds, the mockeries, the insults, Death.
   Rough as it were is the way; it makes thee to be slow; thou hast no
   mind to follow. But follow on. Rough is the way which man has made for
   himself, but what Christ hath trodden in His passage is worn smooth.
   For who would not wish to go to exaltation? Elevation is pleasing to
   all; but humility is the step to it. Why dost thou put out thy foot
   beyond thee? Thou hast a mind to fall, not to ascend. Begin by the
   step, and so thou hast ascended. This step of humility those two
   disciples were loth to have an eye to, who said, "Lord, bid that one of
   us may sit at Thy right hand, and the other at the left in Thy
   kingdom." [3164] They sought for exaltation, they did not see the step.
   But the Lord showed them the step. For what did He answer them? "Ye who
   seek the hill of exaltation, can ye drink the cup of humiliation?" And
   therefore He does not say simply, "Let him deny himself, and follow Me"
   howsoever: but He said more, "Let him take up his cross, and follow
   Me."

   4. What is, "Let him take up his cross"? Let him bear whatever trouble
   he has; so let him follow Me. For when he shall begin to follow Me in
   conformity to My life and precepts, he will have many to contradict
   him, he will have many to hinder him, he will have many to dissuade
   him, and that from among those who are even as it were Christ's
   companions. They who hindered the blind men from crying out were
   walking with Christ. [3165] Whether therefore they be threats or
   caresses, or whatsoever hindrances there be, if thou wish to follow,
   turn them into thy cross, bear it, carry it, do not give way beneath
   it. There seems to be an exhortation to martyrdom in these words of the
   Lord. If there be persecution, ought not all things to be despised in
   consideration of Christ? The world is loved; but let Him be preferred
   by whom the world was made. Great is the world; but greater is He by
   whom the world was made. Fair is the world; but fairer is He by whom
   the world was made. Sweet is the world; but sweeter is He by whom the
   world was made. Evil is the world; and good is He by whom the world was
   made. How shall I be able to explain and unravel what I have said? May
   God help me? For what have I said? what have ye applauded? See, it is
   but a question, and yet ye have already applauded. How is the world
   evil, if He by whom the world was made is good? Did not God make all
   things, "and behold they were very good"? Does not Scripture at each
   several work of creation testify that God made it good, by saying, "And
   God saw that it was good," and at the end summed them all up together
   thus how that God had made them, "And behold they were very good"?
   [3166]

   5. How then is the world evil, and He good by whom the world was made?
   How? "Since the world was made by Him, and the world knew Him not."
   [3167] The world was made by Him, the heaven and earth and all things
   that are in them: "the world knew Him not," the lovers of the world;
   the lovers of the world and the despisers of God; this "world knew Him
   not." So then the world is evil, because they are evil who prefer the
   world to God. And He is good who made the world, the heaven, and earth,
   and sea, and themselves who love the world. For this only, that they
   love the world and do not love God, He made not in them. But
   themselves, all that appertains to their nature He made; what
   appertains to guiltiness, He made not. This is that I said a little
   while ago, "Let man efface what he has made, and so will he be
   well-pleasing to Him who made Him."

   6. For there is among men themselves a good world also; but one that
   has been made good from being evil. For the whole world if you take the
   word "world" for men, putting aside (what we call the world) the heaven
   and earth and all things that in them are; if you take the world for
   men, the whole world did he who first sinned make evil. The whole mass
   was corrupted in the root. God made man good; so runs the Scripture,
   "God made man upright; and men themselves found out many cogitations."
   [3168] Run from these "many" to One, gather up thy scattered things
   into one: flow on together, fence thyself in, abide with One; go not to
   many things. There is blessedness. But we have flowed away, have gone
   on to perdition: we were all born with sin, and to that sin wherein we
   were born have we too added by our evil living, and the whole world has
   become evil. But Christ came, and He chose that which He made, not what
   He found; for He found all evil, and by His grace He made them good.
   And so was made another "world;" and the "world" now persecutes the
   "world."

   7. What is the "world" which persecutes? That of which it is said to
   us, "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If
   any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all
   that is in the world, is the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the
   eyes, and the pride of life, which is not of the Father, but of the
   world. And the world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that
   doeth the will of God abideth for ever," [3169] even as God abideth for
   ever. Lo! I have spoken of two "worlds," the "world" which persecutes,
   and that which it persecutes. What is the "world" which persecutes?
   "All that is the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the
   eyes, and the pride of life, which is not of the Father, but of the
   world;" and "the world passeth away." Lo, this is the "world" which
   persecutes. What is the "world" which it persecutes? "He that doeth the
   will of God abideth for ever," even as God abideth for ever.

   8. But see, that which persecutes is called the "world;" let us prove
   whether that also which suffers persecution is called "the world."
   What! Art thou deaf to the voice of Christ who speaketh, or rather to
   Holy Scripture which testifieth, "God was in Christ reconciling the
   world unto Himself." [3170] "If the world hate you, know ye that it
   first hated Me." [3171] See, the "world" hates. What does it hate but
   the "world"? What "world"? "God was in Christ reconciling the world
   unto Himself." The condemned "world" persecutes; the reconciled "world"
   suffers persecution. The condemned "world" is all that is without the
   Church; the reconciled "world" is the Church. For He says, "The Son of
   Man came not to judge the world, but that the world through Him may be
   saved." [3172]

   9. Now in this world, holy, good, reconciled, saved, or rather to be
   saved, and now saved in hope, "for we are saved in hope;" [3173] in
   this world, I say, that is in the Church which wholly follows Christ,
   He hath said as of universal application, "Whosoever will follow Me,
   let him deny himself." For it is not that the virgins ought to give ear
   to this, and the married women ought not; or that the widows ought, and
   the women who still have their husbands ought not; or that monks ought,
   and the married men ought not; or that the clergy ought, and the laymen
   ought not: but let the whole Church, the whole body, all the members,
   distinguished and distributed throughout their several offices, follow
   Christ. Let the whole Church follow Him, that only Church, let the dove
   follow Him, let the spouse follow Him, let her who has been redeemed
   and endowed with the Bridegroom's blood, follow Him. There virgin
   purity hath its place; there widowed continence hath its place; married
   chastity there hath its place; but adultery hath no place of its own
   there; and no place there hath lasciviousness, unlawful and meet for
   punishment. But let these several members which have their place there,
   in their kind and place and measure, "follow Christ;" let them "deny
   themselves;" that is, let them presume nothing of themselves: let them
   "take up their cross," that is, let them in the world endure for
   Christ's sake whatever the world may bring upon them. Let them love
   Him, who Alone doth not deceive, who Alone is not deceived, Alone
   deceiveth not; let them love Him, for that is true which He doth
   promise. But because He doth not give at once, faith wavers. Hold on,
   persevere, endure, bear delay and thou hast borne the cross.

   10. Let not the virgin say, "I shall alone be there." For Mary shall
   not be there alone but the widow Anna shall be there also. Let not the
   woman which hath an husband say, "The widow will be there, not I;" for
   it is not that Anna will be there, and Susanna not be there. But by all
   means let them who would be there prove themselves hereby, that they
   who have here a lower place envy not, but love in others the better
   place. For, for instance, my Brethren, that ye may understand me; one
   man has chosen a married life, another a life of continence; if he who
   has chosen the married life, has adulterous lusts, he has "looked
   back;" he has lusted after that which is unlawful. He too who would
   wish afterwards to return from continence to a married life, has
   "looked back;" he has chosen what is in itself lawful, yet he has
   "looked back." Is marriage then to be condemned? No. Marriage is not to
   be condemned; but see whither he had come who has chosen it. He had
   already got before it. When he was living as a young man in
   voluptuousness, marriage was before him; he was making his way towards
   it; but when he had chosen continence, marriage was behind him.
   "Remember," saith the Lord, "Lot's wife." [3174] Lot's wife, by looking
   behind, remained motionless. To whatever point then any one has been
   able to reach, let him fear to "look back" from thence; and let him
   walk in the way, let him "follow Christ." "Forgetting those things
   which are behind, and stretching forth unto those things which are
   before, let him by an earnest inward intention press on toward the
   prize of the calling of God in Christ Jesus." [3175] Let those that are
   married regard the unmarried as above themselves; let them acknowledge
   that they are better; let them in them love what themselves have not;
   and let them in them love Christ.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3157] Mark viii. 34.

   [3158] Ps. xvi. 4, Sept. (xvii. English version).

   [3159] Matt. xi. 30.

   [3160] 2 Tim. iii. 2.

   [3161] Luke xv. 17.

   [3162] Luke xv. 18.

   [3163] Jer. xvii. 5.

   [3164] Mark x. 37.

   [3165] Vid. Serm. xxxviii. (lxxxviii. Ben.) 13 (xiv). Matt. xx. 31.

   [3166] Gen. i.

   [3167] John i. 10.

   [3168] Eccles. vii. 30, Sept. (vii. 29, English version).

   [3169] 1 John ii. 15, etc.

   [3170] 2 Cor. v. 19.

   [3171] John xv. 18.

   [3172] John iii. 17.

   [3173] Rom. viii. 24.

   [3174] Luke xvii. 32.

   [3175] Phil. iii. 13, 14.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLVII.

   [XCVII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Mark xiii. 32, "But of that day or that
   hour knoweth no one, not even the angels in heaven, neither the Son,
   but the Father."

   1. The advice, Brethren, which ye have just heard Scripture give, when
   it tells us to watch for the last day, every one should think of as
   concerning his own last day; lest haply when ye judge or think the last
   day of the world to be far distant, ye slumber with respect to your own
   last day. Ye have heard what Jesus said concerning the last day of this
   world, "That neither the Angels of heaven, nor the Son knew it, but the
   Father." [3176] Where indeed there is a great difficulty, lest
   understanding this in a carnal way, we think that the Father knoweth
   anything which the Son knoweth not. For indeed when He said, "the
   Father knoweth it;" He said this because in the Father the Son also
   knoweth it. For what is there in a day which was not made by the Word,
   by whom the day was made? Let no one then search out for the last Day,
   when it is to be; but let us watch all by our good lives, lest the last
   day of any one of us find us unprepared, and such as any one shall
   depart hence on his last day, such he be found in the last day of the
   world. Nothing will then assist thee which thou shalt not have done
   here. His own works will succour, or his own works will overwhelm every
   one.

   2. And how have we in the Psalm sung unto the Lord, "Lord, have mercy
   on me, for man hath trodden me down"? [3177] He is called a man who
   lives after the manner of men. For it is said to them who live after
   God, "Ye are gods, and ye are all the children of the Most High."
   [3178] But to the reprobate, who were called to be the sons of God, and
   who wished rather to be men, that is, to live after the manner of men,
   he says, "But ye shall die like men, and fall as one of the princes."
   [3179] For that man is mortal, ought to avail for his instruction, not
   for boasting. Whereupon does a worm that is to die on the morrow boast
   himself? I speak to your love, Brethren; proud mortals ought to be made
   blush by the devil. For he, though proud, is yet immortal; he is a
   spirit, though a malignant one. The last day is kept in store for him
   at the end as his punishment; nevertheless he is not subject to the
   death to which we are subject. But man heard the sentence, "Thou shalt
   surely die." [3180] Let him make a good use of his punishment. What is
   that I have said, "Let him make a good use of his punishment"? Let him
   not by that from which he received his punishment fall into pride; let
   him acknowledge that he is mortal, and let it break down his elation.
   Let him hear it said to him, "Why is earth and ashes proud?" [3181]
   Even if the devil is proud, he is not "earth and ashes." Therefore was
   it said, "But ye shall die like men, and shall fall as one of the
   princes." [3182] Ye do not consider that ye are mortals, and ye are
   proud as the devil. Let man then make a good use of his punishment,
   Brethren; let him make a good use of his evil, that he may make
   advancement to his good. Who does not know, that the necessity of our
   dying is a punishment; and the more grievous, that we know not when?
   The punishment is certain, the hour uncertain; and of that punishment
   alone are we certain in the ordinary course of human affairs.

   3. All else of ours, both good and evil, is uncertain; death alone is
   certain. What is this that I say? A child is conceived, perhaps it will
   be born, perhaps it will be an untimely birth. So it is uncertain:
   Perhaps he will grow up, perhaps he will not grow up; perhaps he will
   grow old, perhaps he will not grow old; perhaps he will be rich,
   perhaps poor; perhaps he will be distinguished, perhaps abased; perhaps
   he will have children, perhaps he will not; perhaps he will marry,
   perhaps not; and so on, whatever else among good things you may name.
   Now look too at the evils of life: Perhaps he will have sickness,
   perhaps he will have not; perhaps he will be stung by a serpent,
   perhaps not; perhap he will be devoured by a wild beast, perhaps he
   will not. And so look at all evils; everywhere is there a "perhaps it
   will be," and "perhaps it will not." But canst thou say, "Perhaps he
   will die," and "perhaps he will not die"? [3183] As when medical men
   examine an illness, and ascertain that it is fatal, they make this
   announcement; "He will die, he will not get over this." So from the
   moment of a man's birth, it may be said, "He will not get over this."
   When he is born he begins to be ailing. When he dies, he ends indeed
   this ailment: but he knows not whether he does not fall into a worse.
   The rich man in the Gospel had ended his voluptuous ailment, he came to
   a tormenting one. But the poor man ended his ailment, and arrived at
   perfect health. [3184] But he made choice in this life of what he was
   to have hereafter; and what he reaped there, he sowed here. Therefore
   while we live we ought to watch, and to make choice of that which we
   may possess in the world to come.

   4. Let us not love the world. It overwhelms its lovers, it conducts
   them to no good. We must rather labour in it that it seduce us not,
   than fear lest it should fall. Lo, the world falleth; the Christian
   standeth firm; because Christ doth not fall. For wherefore saith the
   Lord, "Rejoice, for that I have overcome the world"? [3185] We might
   answer Him if we pleased, "Rejoice,' yes do Thou rejoice. If Thou hast
   overcome,' do thou rejoice. Why should we?" Why doth He say to us,
   "Rejoice;" but because it is for us that He hath overcome, for us hath
   fought? For wherein fought He? In that He took man's nature upon Him.
   Take away His birth of a virgin, take away that He emptied Himself,
   "taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and
   found in fashion as a man;" [3186] take away this, and where is the
   combat, where the contest? where the trial? where the victory, which no
   battle has preceded? "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
   with God, and the Word was God. All things were made by Him, and
   without Him was nothing made." [3187] Could the Jews have crucified
   this Word? Could those impious men have mocked this Word? Could this
   Word have been buffeted? Could this Word have been crowned with thorns?
   But that He might suffer all this, "the Word was made flesh;" [3188]
   and after He had suffered all this, by rising again He "overcame." So
   then He hath "overcome" for us, to whom He hath shown the assurance of
   His resurrection. Thou sayest then to God, "Have mercy upon me, O Lord,
   for man hath trodden me down." [3189] Do not "tread down" thyself, and
   man will not overcome thee. For, lo, some powerful man alarms thee. By
   what does he alarm thee? "I will spoil thee, will condemn, will
   torture, will kill thee." And thou criest, "Have mercy upon me, O Lord,
   for man hath trodden me down." If thou say the truth, and mark thyself
   well, one dead "treads thee down," because thou art afraid of the
   threats of a man; and man "treads thee down," because thou wouldest not
   be afraid, unless thou wert a man. What is the remedy then? O man,
   cleave to God, by whom thou wast made a man; cleave fast to Him, put
   thy affiance in Him, call upon Him, let Him be thy strength. Say to
   Him, "In Thee, O Lord, is my strength." And then thou shalt sing at the
   threatenings of men; and what thou shalt sing hereafter, the Lord
   Himself telleth thee, "I will hope in God, I will not fear what man can
   do unto me." [3190]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3176] Mark xiii. 32.

   [3177] Ps. lv. 2, Sept. (lvi. 1, English version).

   [3178] Ps. lxxxii. 6.

   [3179] Ps. lxxxii. 7.

   [3180] Gen. ii. 17.

   [3181] Ecclus. x. 9.

   [3182] Ps. lxxxii. 7.

   [3183] Vid. Serm. xxvii (lxxvii. Ben.) 14 (x.).

   [3184] Luke xvi. 22.

   [3185] John xvi. 33.

   [3186] Phil. ii. 7.

   [3187] John i. 1, 3.

   [3188] John i. 14.

   [3189] Ps. lv. 2, Sept. (lvi. 1, English version).

   [3190] Ps. lvi. 11.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLVIII.

   [XCVIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke vii. 2, etc.; on the three dead
   persons whom the Lord raised.

   1. The miracles of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ make indeed an
   impression on all who hear of, and believe them; but on different men
   in different ways. For some amazed at His miracles done on the bodies
   of men, have no knowledge to discern the greater; whereas some admire
   the more ample fulfilment in the souls of men at the present time of
   those things which they hear of as having been wrought on their bodies.
   The Lord Himself saith, "For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and
   quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom He will." [3191] Not
   of course that the Son "quickeneth" some, the Father others; but the
   Father and the Son "quicken" the same; for the Father doeth all things
   by the Son. Let no one then who is a Christian doubt, that even at the
   present time the dead are raised. Now all men have eyes, wherewith they
   can see the dead rise again in such sort, as the son of that widow
   rose, of whom we have just read out of the Gospel; [3192] but those
   eyes wherewith men see the dead in heart rise again, all men have not,
   save those who have risen already in heart themselves. It is a greater
   miracle to raise again one who is to live for ever, than to raise one
   who must die again.

   2. The widowed mother rejoiced at the raising again of that young man;
   of men raised again in spirit day by day does Mother Church rejoice. He
   indeed was dead in the body but they in soul. His visible death was
   bewailed visibly; their death invisible was neither enquired into nor
   perceived. He sought them out who had known them to be dead; He Alone
   knew them to be dead, who was able to make them alive. For if the Lord
   had not come to raise the dead, the Apostle would not have said, "Rise,
   thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
   light." [3193] You hear of one asleep in the words, "Rise, thou that
   sleepest;" but understand it of one dead when you hear, "And arise from
   the dead." Thus they who are even dead in the body [3194] are often
   said to be asleep. And certainly they all are but asleep, in respect of
   Him who is able to awaken them. For in respect of thee, a dead man is
   dead indeed, seeing he will not awake, beat or prick or tear him as
   thou wilt. But in respect of Christ, he was but asleep to whom it was
   said, "Arise," [3195] and he arose forthwith. No one can as easily
   awaken another in bed, as Christ can in the tomb.

   3. Now we find that three dead persons were raised by the Lord
   "visibly," thousands "invisibly." Nay, who knows even how many dead He
   raised visibly? For all the things that He did are not written. John
   tells us this, "Many other things Jesus did, the which if they should
   be written, I suppose that the whole world could not contain the
   books." [3196] So then there were without doubt many others raised: but
   it is not without a meaning that the three are expressly recorded. For
   our Lord Jesus Christ would that those things which He did on the body
   should be also spiritually understood. For He did not merely do
   miracles for the miracles' sake; but in order that the things which He
   did should inspire wonder in those who saw them, and convey truth to
   them who understand. As he who sees letters in an excellently written
   manuscript, and knows not how to read, praises indeed the transcriber's
   [3197] hand, and admires the beauty of the characters; [3198] but what
   those characters mean or signify he does not know; and by the sight of
   his eyes he is a praiser of the work, but in his mind has no
   comprehension of it; whereas another man both praises the work, and is
   capable of understanding it; such an one, I mean, who is not only able
   to see what is common to all, but who can read also; which he who has
   never learned cannot. So they who saw Christ's miracles, and understood
   not what they meant, and what they in a manner conveyed to those who
   had understanding, wondered only at the miracles themselves; whereas
   others both wondered at the miracles, and attained to the meaning of
   them. Such ought we to be in the school of Christ. For he who says that
   Christ only worked miracles, for the miracles' sake, may say too that
   He was ignorant that it was not the time for fruit, when He sought figs
   upon the fig-tree. [3199] For it was not the time for that fruit, as
   the Evangelist testifies; and yet being hungry He sought for fruit upon
   the tree. Did not Christ know, what any peasant knew? What the dresser
   of the tree knew, did not the tree's Creator know? So then when being
   hungry He sought fruit on the tree, He signified that He was hungry,
   and seeking after something else than this; and He found that tree
   without fruit, but full of leaves, and He cursed it, and it withered
   away. What had the tree done in not bearing fruit? What fault of the
   tree was its fruitlessness? No; but there are those who through their
   own will are not able to yield fruit. And barrenness is "their" fault,
   whose fruitfulness is their will. The Jews then who had the words of
   the Law, and had not the deeds, were full of leaves, and bare no fruit.
   This have I said to persuade you, that our Lord Jesus Christ performed
   miracles with this view, that by those miracles He might signify
   something further, that besides that they were wonderful and great, and
   divine in themselves, we might learn also something from them.

   4. Let us then see what He would have us learn in those three dead
   persons whom He raised. He raised again the dead daughter of the ruler
   of the synagogue, for whom when she was sick petition was made to Him,
   that He would deliver her from her sickness. And as He is going, it is
   announced that she is dead; and as though He would now be only wearying
   Himself in vain, word was brought to her father, "Thy daughter is dead,
   why weariest thou the Master any further?" [3200] But He went on, and
   said to the father of the damsel, "Be not afraid, only believe." [3201]
   He comes to the house, and finds the customary funeral obsequies
   already prepared, and He says to them, "Weep not, for the damsel is not
   dead, but sleepeth." [3202] He spake the truth; she was asleep; asleep,
   that is, in respect of Him, by whom she could be awakened. So awakening
   her, He restored her alive to her parents. So again He awakened that
   young man, the widow's son, [3203] by whose case I have been now
   reminded to speak with you, Beloved, on this subject, as He Himself
   shall vouchsafe to give me power. Ye have just heard how he was
   awakened. The Lord "came nigh to the city; and behold there was a dead
   man being carried out" already beyond the gate. Moved with compassion,
   for that the mother, a widow and bereaved of her only son, was weeping,
   He did what ye have heard, saying, "Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.
   He that was dead arose, and began to speak, and He restored him to his
   mother." [3204] He awakened Lazarus likewise from the tomb. And in that
   case when the disciples with whom He was speaking knew that he was
   sick, He said (now "Jesus loved him"), "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth."
   They thinking of the sick man's healthful sleep; say, "Lord, if he
   sleep he is well." "Then said Jesus," speaking now more plainly, I tell
   you, "our friend Lazarus is dead." [3205] And in both He said the
   truth; "He is dead in respect of you, he is asleep in respect of Me."

   5. These three kinds of dead persons, are three kinds of sinners whom
   even at this day Christ doth raise. For that dead daughter of the ruler
   of the synagogue was within in the house, she had not yet been carried
   out from the secresy of its walls into public view. There within was
   she raised, and restored alive to her parents. But the second was not
   now indeed in the house, but still not yet in the tomb, he had been
   carried out of the walls, but not committed to the ground. He who
   raised the dead maiden who was not yet carried out, raised this dead
   man who was now carried out, but not yet buried. There remained a third
   case, that He should raise one who was also buried; and this He did in
   Lazarus. There are then those who have sin inwardly in the heart, but
   have it not yet in overt act. A man, for instance, is disturbed by any
   lust. For the Lord Himself saith, "Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust
   after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart."
   [3206] He has not yet in body approached her, but in heart he has
   consented; he has one dead within, he has not yet carried him out. And
   as it often happens, as we know, as men daily experience in themselves,
   when they hear the word of God, as it were the Lord saying, "Arise;"
   the consent unto sin is condemned, they breathe again unto saving
   health and righteousness. The dead man in the house arises, the heart
   revives in the secret of the thoughts. This resurrection of a dead soul
   takes place within, in the retirement of the conscience, as it were
   within the walls of the house. Others after consent proceed to overt
   act, carrying out the dead as it were, that that which was concealed in
   secret, may appear in public. Are these now, who have advanced to the
   outward act, past hope? Was it not said to the young man in the Gospel
   also, "I say unto thee, Arise"? Was he not also restored to his mother?
   So then he too who has committed the open act, if haply admonished and
   aroused by the word of truth, he rise again at the Voice of Christ, is
   restored alive. Go so far he could, perish for ever he could not. But
   they who by doing what is evil, involve themselves even in evil habit,
   so that this very habit of evil suffers them not to see that it is
   evil, become defenders of their evil deeds; are angry when they are
   found fault with; to such a degree, that the men of Sodom of old said
   to the righteous man who reproved their abominable design, "Thou art
   come to sojourn, not to give laws." [3207] So powerful in that place
   was the habit of abominable filthiness, that profligacy now passed for
   righteousness, and the hinderer of it was found fault with rather than
   the doer. Such as these pressed down by a malignant habit, are as it
   were buried. Yea, what shall I say, Brethren? In such sort buried, as
   was said of Lazarus, "By this time he stinketh." [3208] That heap
   placed upon the grave, is this stubborn force of habit, whereby the
   soul is pressed down, and is not suffered either to rise, or breathe
   again.

   6. Now it was said, "He hath been dead four days." [3209] So in truth
   the soul arrives at that habit, of which I am speaking by a kind of
   four-fold progress. For there is first the provocation as it were of
   pleasure in the heart, secondly consent, thirdly the overt act,
   fourthly the habit. For there are those who so entirely throw off
   things unlawful from their thoughts, as not even to feel any pleasure
   in them. There are those who do feel the pleasure, and do not consent
   to them; death is not yet perfected, but in a certain sort begun. To
   the feeling of pleasure is added consent; now at once is that
   condemnation incurred. After the consent, progress is made unto the
   open act; the act changes into a habit; and a sort of desperate
   condition is produced, so as that it may be said, "He hath been dead
   four days, by this time he stinketh." Therefore, the Lord came, to whom
   of course all things were easy; yet He found in that case as it were a
   kind of difficulty. He "groaned" [3210] in the spirit, He showed that
   there is need of much and loud remonstrance to raise up those who have
   grown hard by habit. Yet at the voice of the Lord's cry, the bands of
   necessity were burst asunder. The powers of hell trembled, and Lazarus
   is restored alive. For the Lord delivers even from evil habits those
   who "have been dead four days;" for this man in the Gospel, "who had
   been dead four days," was asleep only in respect of Christ whose will
   it was to raise him again. But what said He? Observe the manner of his
   arising again. He came forth from the tomb alive, but he could not
   walk. And the Lord said to the disciples; "Loose him, and let him go."
   [3211] "He" raised him from death, "they" loosed him from his bonds.
   Observe how there is something which appertaineth to the special
   Majesty of God who raiseth up. A man involved in an evil habit is
   rebuked by the word of truth. How many are rebuked, and give no ear!
   Who is it then who deals within with him who does give ear? Who
   breathes life into him within? Who is it who drives away the unseen
   death, gives the life unseen? After rebukes, after remonstrances, are
   not men left alone to their own thoughts, do they not begin to turn
   over in their minds how evil a life they are living, with how very bad
   a habit they are weighed down? Then displeased with themselves, they
   determine to change their life. Such have risen again; they to whom
   what they have been is displeasing have revived: but though reviving,
   they are not able to walk. These are the bands of their guilt. Need
   then there is, that whoso has returned to life should be loosed, and
   let go. This office hath He given to the disciples to whom He said,
   "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven also."
   [3212]

   7. Let us then, dearly Beloved, in such wise hear these things, that
   they who are alive may live; they who are dead may live again. Whether
   it be that as yet the sin has been conceived in the heart, and not come
   forth into open act; let the thought be repented of, and corrected, let
   the dead within the house of conscience arise. Or whether he has
   actually committed what he thought of; let not even thus his case be
   despaired of. The dead within has not arisen, let him arise when "he is
   carried out." Let him repent him of his deed, let him at once return to
   life; let him not go to the depth of the grave, let him not receive the
   load of habit upon him. But peradventure I am now speaking to one who
   is already pressed down by this hard stone of his own habit, who is
   already laden with the weight of custom, who "has been in the grave
   four days already, and who stinketh." Yet let not even him despair; he
   is dead in the depth below, but Christ is exalted on high. He knows how
   by His cry to burst asunder the burdens of earth, He knows how to
   restore life within by Himself, and to deliver him to the disciples to
   be loosed. Let even such as these repent. For when Lazarus had been
   raised again after the four days, no foul smell remained in him when he
   was alive. So then let them who are alive, still live; and let them who
   are dead, whosoever they be, in which kind soever of these three deaths
   they find themselves, see to it that they rise again at once with all
   speed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3191] John v. 21.

   [3192] Luke vii. 12.

   [3193] Eph. v. 14.

   [3194] Visibiliter.

   [3195] Luke vii. 14.

   [3196] John xxi. 25.

   [3197] Antiquarii.

   [3198] Apicum.

   [3199] Vid. Serm. xxxix. (lxxxix. Ben.). Mark xi. 13.

   [3200] Mark v. 35.

   [3201] Mark v. 36.

   [3202] Mark v. 39.

   [3203] Luke vii. 12.

   [3204] Luke vii. 14, 15.

   [3205] John xi. 11, etc.

   [3206] Matt. v. 28.

   [3207] Gen. xix. 9.

   [3208] John xi. 39.

   [3209] John xi. 39.

   [3210] John xi. 38.

   [3211] John xi. 44.

   [3212] Matt. xviii. 18.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XLIX.

   [XCIX. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke vii. 37, "And behold, a woman who was
   in the city, a sinner," etc. On the remission of sins, against the
   Donatists.

   1. Since I believe that it is the will of God that I should speak to
   you on the subject whereof we are now reminded by the words of the Lord
   out of the Holy Scriptures, I will by His assistance deliver to you,
   Beloved, a Sermon touching the remission of sins. For when the Gospel
   was being read, ye gave most earnest heed, and the story was reported,
   and represented before the eyes of your heart. For ye saw, not with the
   body, but with the mind, the Lord Jesus Christ "sitting at meat in the
   Pharisee's house," [3213] and when invited by him, not disdaining to
   go. Ye saw too a "woman" famous in the city, famous indeed in ill fame,
   "who was a sinner," without invitation force her way into the feast,
   where her Physician was at meat, and with an holy shamelessness seek
   for health. She forced her way then, as it were unseasonably as
   regarded the feast, but seasonably as regarded her expected blessing;
   for she well knew under how severe a disease she was labouring, and she
   knew that He to whom she had come was able to make her whole; she
   approached then, not to the Head of the Lord, but to His Feet; and she
   who had walked long in evil, sought now the steps of Uprightness. First
   she shed tears, the heart's blood; and washed the Lord's Feet with the
   duty of confession. She wiped them with her hair, she kissed, she
   anointed them: she spake by her silence; she uttered not a word, but
   she manifested her devotion.

   2. So then because she touched the Lord, in watering, kissing, washing,
   anointing His feet; the Pharisee who had invited the Lord Jesus Christ,
   seeing He was of that kind of proud men of whom the Prophet Isaiah
   says, "Who say, Depart far from me, touch me not, for I am clean;"
   [3214] thought that the Lord did not know the woman. This he was
   thinking with himself, and saying in his heart, "This man if He were a
   prophet, would have known what woman this is that" hath approached His
   feet. He supposed that He did not know her, because He repelled her
   not, because He did not forbid her to approach Him, because He suffered
   Himself to be touched by her, sinner as she was. For whence knew he,
   that He did not know her? But what if He did know, O thou Pharisee,
   inviter and yet derider of the Lord! Thou dost feed the Lord, yet by
   whom thou art to be fed thyself, thou dost not understand. Whereby
   knowest thou, that the Lord did not know what that woman had been, save
   because she was permitted to approach Him, save because by His
   sufferance she kissed His Feet, save because she washed, save because
   she anointed them? For these things a woman unclean ought not to be
   permitted to do with the Feet that are clean? So then had such a woman
   approached that Pharisee's feet, he would have been sure to say what
   Isaiah says of such; "Depart from me, touch me not, for I am clean."
   But she approached the Lord in her uncleanness, that she might return
   clean: she approached sick, that she might return whole: she approached
   Him, confessing, that she might return professing Him.

   3. For the Lord heard the thoughts of the Pharisee. Let now the
   Pharisee understand even by this, whether He was not able to see her
   sins, who could hear his thoughts. So then He put forth to the man a
   parable concerning two men, who owed to the same creditor. For He was
   desirous to heal the Pharisee also, that He might not eat bread at his
   house for nought; He hungered after him who was feeding Him, He wished
   to reform him, to slay, to eat him, to pass him over into His Own Body;
   just as to that woman of Samaria, He said, "I thirst." What is, "I
   thirst"? I long for thy faith. Therefore are the words of the Lord in
   this parable [3215] spoken; and there is this double object in them,
   both that that inviter might be cured together with those who ate at
   the table with Him, who alike saw the Lord Jesus Christ, and were alike
   ignorant of Him, and that that woman might have the assurance her
   confession merited, and not be pricked any more with the stings of her
   conscience. "One," said He, "owed five hundred denarii, and the other
   fifty; He forgave them both: which loved him most?" He to whom the
   parable was proposed answered, what of course common reason obliged him
   to answer. "I suppose, Lord, he to whom he forgave most. Then turning
   to the woman he said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into
   thine house, thou gavest Me no water for My feet: she hath washed My
   feet with tears, and wiped them with her hairs. Thou gavest Me no kiss:
   this woman since the time she came in, hath not ceased to kiss My feet.
   My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed My
   feet with ointment. Therefore I say, her many sins are forgiven her,
   for she loved much. But to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth
   little." [3216]

   4. Here arises a difficulty which must in real truth be resolved, and
   which requires your fixed attention, Beloved, lest haply my words may
   not be equal to the removing and clearing of the whole obscurity of it
   by reason of the stress of time; especially as this flesh of mine
   exhausted by its heat, now longs to be recruited, and demanding its
   due, and clogging the eagerness of the soul gives proof of that which
   is said, "The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak." [3217]
   Cause there is for fear, yea great cause for fear, lest by these words
   of the Lord, there steal over the minds of those who understand them
   not aright, who indulge their fleshly lusts, and are loth to be brought
   away from them into liberty, that sentiment which, even as the Apostles
   preached, sprung up in the tongues of slanderous men, of whom the
   Apostle Paul says, "And as some affirm that we say, Let us do evil that
   good may come." [3218] For a man may say, "If he to whom little is
   forgiven, loveth little;' and he to whom more is forgiven, loveth more;
   and it is better to love more, than to love less; it is right that we
   should sin much, and owe much which we may desire to be forgiven us,
   that so we may love Him the more who forgiveth us our large debts. For
   that woman in the Gospel who was a sinner, in the same proportion as
   she owed more, loved the more Him who forgave her her debts, as the
   Lord Himself saith, Her many sins are forgiven her, for she loved
   much.' Now why did she love much, but because she owed much? And
   afterwards He added and subjoined, But to whom little is forgiven, the
   same loveth little.' Is it not better," he may say, "that much should
   be forgiven me, than less, that thereupon I may love my Lord the more"?
   Ye see no doubt the great depth of this difficulty; ye see it, I am
   sure. Ye see too my stress of time; yes, this also do ye see and feel.

   5. Accept then a few words. If I shall not do justice to the magnitude
   of the question, lay up for a time [3219] what I shall say at present,
   and hold me a debtor for some future time. Suppose now two men, that by
   the clearer force of examples ye may think upon what I have proposed to
   you. One of them is full of sins, has lived most wickedly for a length
   of time; the other of them has committed but few sins; they come both
   to grace, are both baptized, they enter debtors, they go out free; more
   has been forgiven to one, less to the other. I ask, how much does each
   love? If I shall find that he loves most, to whom the most sins have
   been forgiven, it is to his greater advantage that he has sinned much,
   his much iniquity was to his greater advantage, that so his love might
   not be lukewarm. I ask the other how much he loves, I find less; for if
   I find that he too loves, as much as the other, to whom much has been
   forgiven, how shall I make answer to the words of the Lord, how shall
   that be true which the Truth hath said, "To whom little is forgiven,
   the same loveth little"? "See," a man says, "but little has been
   forgiven me, I have not sinned much; yet I love as much as he, to whom
   much has been forgiven." Dost thou speak truth, or Christ? Has thy lie
   been forgiven thee to this end, that thou shouldest fix the charge of
   lying on Him who forgave thee? If little has been forgiven thee, thou
   lovest little. For if but little has been forgiven thee, and thou
   lovest very much, thou contradictest Him who said, "To whom little is
   forgiven, the same loveth little." Therefore I give the more credit to
   Him, who knoweth thee better than thou dost know thyself. If thou dost
   suppose that but little hath been forgiven thee, it is certain that
   thou lovest but little. "What then," says he, "ought I to do? Ought I
   to commit many sins, that there may be many which He shall be able to
   forgive me, that I may be able to love more?" It presses me sore, but
   may the Lord, who hath proposed this saying of truth to us, deliver me
   out of this strait.

   6. This was spoken on account of that Pharisee who thought that he had
   either no sins, or but few. Now unless he had had some love, he would
   not have invited the Lord. But how little was it! He gave Him no kiss,
   not so much as water for His Feet, much less tears; he did not honour
   Him with any of those offices of respect, with which that woman did,
   who well knew what need she had of being cured, and by whom she might
   be cured. O Pharisee, therefore dost thou love but little, because thou
   dost fondly think that but little is forgiven thee; not because little
   really is forgiven thee, but because thou thinkest that that which is
   forgiven is but little. "What then?" he says; "Am I who have never
   committed murder, to be reckoned a murderer? Am I who have never been
   guilty of adultery, to be punished for adultery? Or are these things to
   be forgiven me, which I have never committed?" See: once more suppose
   two persons, and let us speak to them. One comes with supplication, a
   sinner covered over with thorns as a hedgehog, and timid exceedingly as
   a hare. But the rock is the hedgehog's and the hare's refuge. [3220] He
   comes then to the Rock, he finds refuge, he receives succour. The other
   has not committed many sins; what shall we do for him that he may love
   much? what shall we persuade him? Shall we go against the words of the
   Lord, "To whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little"? Yes, most
   truly so, to whom little is really forgiven. But O thou who sayest that
   thou hast not committed many sins: why hast thou not? by whose
   guidance? God be thanked, that by your movement and voice ye have made
   signs that ye have understood me. Now then, as I think, the difficulty
   has been solved. The one has committed many sins, and so is made a
   debtor for many; the other through God's guidance has committed but
   few. To Him to whom the one ascribes what He hath forgiven, does the
   other also ascribe what he hath not committed. Thou hast not been an
   adulterer in that past life of thine, which was full of ignorance, when
   as yet thou wast not enlightened, as yet discerned not good and evil,
   as yet believed not on Him, who was guiding thee though thou didst not
   know Him. Thus doth thy God speak to thee: "I was guiding thee for
   Myself, I was keeping thee for Myself. That thou mightest not commit
   adultery, no enticers were near thee; that no enticers were near thee,
   was My doing. Place and time were wanting; that they were wanting
   again, was My doing. Or enticers were nigh thee, and neither place nor
   time was wanting; that thou mightest not consent, it was I who alarmed
   thee. Acknowledge then His grace, to whom thou also owest it, that thou
   hast not committed the sin. The other owes me what was done, and thou
   hast seen forgiven him; and thou owest to me what thou hast not done."
   For there is no sin which one man commits, which another man may not
   commit also, if He be wanting as a Director, by whom man was made.

   7. Now then seeing I have resolved this profound difficulty, as best I
   could in so short a space of time (or if I have not resolved it yet,
   let me be held, as I have already said, a debtor for the rest); let us
   now rather consider briefly that question of the remission of sins.
   Christ was supposed to be but a man both by him who invited Him, and by
   them who sat as guests at the table with Him. But that woman who was a
   sinner had seen something more than this in the Lord. For why did she
   all those things, but that her sins might be forgiven her? She knew
   then that He was able to forgive sins; and they knew that no man was
   able to forgive them. And we must believe that they all, they who were
   at the table, that is, and that woman who approached to the Feet of the
   Lord, all knew that no man could forgive sins. Forasmuch then as they
   all knew this; she who believed that He could forgive sins, understood
   Him to be more than man. So when He had said to the woman, "Thy sins
   are forgiven thee;" they immediately said, "Who is this that forgiveth
   sins also?" Who is this, whom the woman who was a sinner already knew?
   Thou who sittest at the table as if in sound health, knowest not thy
   Physician; because it may be through a stronger fever thou hast even
   lost thy reason. For thus the frantic patient as he laughs is bewailed
   by those who are in health. Nevertheless, ye do well to know, and hold
   fast that truth; yea, hold it fast, that no man is able to forgive
   sins. This woman who believed that she could be forgiven by Christ,
   believed Christ not to be man only, but God also. "Who," say they, "is
   this that forgiveth sins also?" And the Lord did not tell them as they
   said, "Who is this?" "It is the Son of God, the Word of God;" He did
   not tell them this, but suffering them to abide for a while still in
   their former opinion, He really solved the question which had excited
   them. For He who saw them at the table, heard their thoughts, and
   turning to the woman, He said, "Thy faith hath made thee whole." Let
   these who say, "Who is this that forgiveth sins also?" who think me to
   be but a man, think me but a man. For thee "thy faith hath made thee
   whole."

   8. The Good Physician not only cured the sick then present, but
   provided also for them who were to be hereafter. There were to be men
   in after times, who should say, "It is I [3221] who forgive sins, I who
   justify, I who sanctify, I who cure whomsoever I baptize." Of this
   number are they who say, "Touch me not." [3222] Yes, so thoroughly are
   they of this number, that lately, in our conference, [3223] as ye may
   read in the records of it, when a place was offered them by the
   commissary, [3224] that they should sit with us, they thought it right
   to answer, "It is told us in Scripture with such not to sit," lest of
   course by the contact of the seats, our contagion (as they think)
   should reach to them. See if this is not, "Touch me not, for I am
   clean." But on another day, when I had a better opportunity, I
   represented to them this most wretched vanity, when there was a
   question concerning the Church, how that the evil in it do not
   contaminate the good: I answered them, because they would not on this
   account sit with us, and said that they had been so advised by the
   Scripture of God, seeing forsooth that it is written, "I have not sat
   in the council of vanity;" [3225] I said, "If ye will not sit with us,
   because it is written, I have not sat in the council of vanity;' why
   have ye entered this place with us, since it is written in the
   following words, And with them that do iniquity I will not enter in'?"
   So then in that they say, "Touch me not, for I am clean," they are like
   to that Pharisee, who had invited the Lord, and who thought that He did
   not know the woman, simply because He did not hinder her from touching
   His Feet. But in another respect the Pharisee was better, because
   whereas he supposed Christ to be but a man, he did not believe that by
   a man sins could be forgiven. There was shown then a better
   understanding in Jews than heretics. What said the Jews? "Who is this
   that forgiveth sins also?' Does any man dare to usurp this to himself?"
   What on the other hand says the heretic? "It is I who forgive, I
   cleanse, I sanctify." Let not me, but Christ, answer him: "O man, when
   I was thought by the Jews to be but a man, I gave forgiveness of sins
   to faith. (It is not I, but Christ who answereth thee.) And thou, O
   heretic, mere man as thou art, dost say, "Come, O woman, I will make
   thee whole." Whereas when I was thought to be but a man, I said, "Go,
   woman, thy faith hath made thee whole."

   9. They answer, "knowing not," as the Apostle says, "either what they
   speak, or whereof they affirm:" [3226] they answer and say, "If men do
   not forgive sins, then that is false which Christ saith, Whatsoever ye
   shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven also.'" [3227] But thou
   dost not know why this is said, and in what sense this is said. The
   Lord was about to give to men the Holy Spirit, and He wished it to be
   understood that sins are forgiven to His faithful by His Holy Spirit,
   and not by men's deserts. For what art thou, O man, but an invalid who
   hast need of healing. Wouldest thou make thyself my physician? Together
   with me, seek the Physician. For that the Lord might show this more
   plainly, that sins are forgiven by the Holy Spirit, which He hath given
   to His faithful ones, and not by men's deserts, after He had risen from
   the dead, He saith in a certain place, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost;"
   [3228] and when He had said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost," He subjoined
   immediately, "Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them;"
   [3229] that is, the Spirit remits them, not ye. Now the Spirit is God.
   God therefore remits, not ye. But what are ye in regard to the Spirit?
   "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and the Spirit of God
   dwelleth in you?" [3230] And again, "Know ye not that your bodies are
   the temples of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God?"
   [3231] So then God dwelleth in His holy temple, that is in His holy
   faithful ones, in His Church; by them doth He remit sins; because they
   are living temples.

   10. But He who remitteth by man, can also remit even without man. For
   He who is able to give by another, hath no less the power to give by
   Himself. To some He gave by the ministry of John. By whom did He give
   to John himself? With good reason, as God wished to show this, and to
   attest this truth, when certain in Samaria had had the Gospel preached
   to them, [3232] and had been baptized, and baptized by Philip the
   Evangelist, one of the seven deacons that were first chosen, they did
   not receive the Holy Ghost, though they had been baptized. Tidings were
   brought to the disciples who were at Jerusalem, and they came to
   Samaria, [3233] in order that they who had been baptized, might by
   imposition of their hands receive the Holy Ghost. And so it was; "They
   came and laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost."
   [3234] For the Holy Ghost was at that time given in such sort, that He
   even visibly showed Himself to have been given. For they who received
   Him spake with the tongues of all nations; to signify that the Church
   among the nations was to speak in the tongues of all. So then they
   received the Holy Ghost, and He appeared evidently to be in them. Which
   when Simon saw, supposing that this power was of men, he wished it
   might be his also. What he thought to be of men, he wished to buy of
   men. "How much money," says he, "will ye take of me, that by imposition
   of my hands the Holy Ghost may be given?" Then Peter says to him with
   execration, "Thou hast neither part nor lot in this faith. For thou
   hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. Thy
   money perish with thee; [3235] and the rest which he spake in the same
   place suitably to the occasion.

   11. Now why I have wished to bring this subject before you, give heed,
   Dearly Beloved. It was meet that God should first show that He worketh
   by the ministry of men; but afterwards by Himself, lest men should
   think, as Simon thought, that it was man's gift, and not God's. Though
   the disciples themselves knew this well already. For there were one
   hundred and twenty [3236] men collected together, when without the
   imposition of any hand the Holy Ghost came upon them. For who had laid
   hands on them at that time? And yet He came, and filled them first.
   After that offence of Simon, what did God do? See Him teaching, not by
   words but by things. That same Philip, who had baptized the men, and
   the Holy Ghost had not come upon them, unless the Apostles had met
   together and laid their hands upon them, baptized the officer, that is,
   the eunuch of queen Candace, who had worshipped in Jerusalem, and
   returning thence was reading in his chariot Isaiah the Prophet, [3237]
   and understood it not. Philip being admonished went up to his chariot,
   explained the Scripture, unfolded the faith, preached Christ. [3238]
   The eunuch believed on Christ, and said when they came unto a certain
   water, "See water, who doth hinder me to be baptized? Philip said to
   him, Dost thou believe on Jesus Christ? He answered, I believe that
   Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Immediately he went down with him into
   the water." [3239] When the mystery and sacrament of Baptism had been
   accomplished, that the gift of the Holy Ghost might not be thought to
   be of men, there was no waiting, as in the other case, for the Apostles
   to come, but the Holy Ghost [3240] came forthwith. Thus was Simon's
   thought destroyed, lest in such a thought he might have followers.

   12. Again, another more wonderful example. Peter came to Cornelius the
   centurion, [3241] to a Gentile man, uncircumcised: he began to preach
   Christ Jesus both to him, and to those who were with him. "While Peter
   was yet speaking," [3242] I do not say, when as yet he had not laid on
   his hands, but when he had not even yet baptized them, and when they
   who were with Peter were in doubt whether the uncircumcised ought to be
   baptized (for there had arisen an offence between the Jews who
   believed, and those who had been brought to the faith from among the
   Gentiles, between the Jews, that is, and the Christians who were
   baptized though uncircumcised), that God might take away this question,
   "while Peter was speaking, the Holy Ghost came," filled Cornelius,
   filled them who were with him. And by this very attestation of so great
   a thing, as it were a loud voice came to Peter, "Why dost thou doubt of
   water? Already I am here."

   13. So then let every soul which is to be delivered from her manifold
   wickedness by the grace of the Lord, to be cleansed as it were in the
   Church from her filthy prostitution, believe with all assurance,
   approach the Feet of the Lord, seek His Footsteps, confess in pouring
   out tears upon them, and wipe them with her hair. The Feet of the Lord
   are the preachers of the Gospel. The woman's hair is all superfluous
   possessions. Let her wipe the Feet with her hair, yea by all means wipe
   them, let her do works of mercy; and when she has wiped them, let her
   kiss them, let her receive peace, that she may have love. She has
   approached to such an one, has been baptized by such an one as the
   Apostle Paul: from him let her hear, "Be ye followers of me, even as I
   also am of Christ." [3243] But she has been baptized by another, by one
   "who seeks his own things, not the things which are Jesus Christ's:"
   [3244] let her hear from the Lord, "Do what they say, but do not what
   they do." [3245] So let her assurance be in Him, whether she meet with
   a good Evangelist, or with one who acts not as he speaks. For she hears
   from the Lord with firm assurance, "O woman, go thy way, thy faith hath
   made thee whole."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3213] Luke vii. 36.

   [3214] Isa. lxv. 5, Sept.

   [3215] John iv. 7.

   [3216] Luke vii. 41, etc.

   [3217] Matt. xxvi. 41.

   [3218] Rom. iii. 8.

   [3219] Interim.

   [3220] Ps. ciii. 18, choirogrulliois, Sept. (civ. English version).

   [3221] The Donatists, holding the validity of Baptism to depend on the
   holiness of the minister, made it, in fact, man's act, man's gift. St.
   Augustin answers, Baptism is Christ's, not man's, and that "as His, it
   availeth equally to whom, however unequal they through whom, it is
   given." Ep. 93, ad Vinc. Don § 47. See other passages, Tract. 67, on
   Holy Baptism, p. 192 sqq.

   [3222] Isa. lxv. 5.

   [3223] The Collatio Carthag. of which part of the acts remain. See also
   St. Augustin, Brev. Coll. c. Don. and Ad Don. post Collat. In it the
   Donatists being entirely confuted by St. Augustin, larger numbers than
   before joined the Church. Poss. Vit. c. 13.

   [3224] Cognitore. Marcellinus, see Serm. xiii. (lxiii. Ben) 18 (xii.)
   note.

   [3225] Ps. xxvi. 4, Sept.

   [3226] 1 Tim. i. 7.

   [3227] Matt. xviii. 18.

   [3228] John xx. 22.

   [3229] John xx. 23.

   [3230] 1 Cor. iii. 16.

   [3231] 1 Cor. vi. 19.

   [3232] Acts viii. 5.

   [3233] Acts viii. 14.

   [3234] Acts viii. 17.

   [3235] Acts viii. 19-21.

   [3236] Acts i. 15.

   [3237] Acts viii. 28.

   [3238] Acts viii. 29.

   [3239] Acts viii. 36, etc.

   [3240] St. Augustin probably conceives of the presence of the Holy
   Ghost, which "caught away Philip," as sanctifying the Eunich. "He went
   on his way rejoicing," his Baptism being perfected. St Augustine is
   followed by the Gloss Ord.

   [3241] Acts x. 25.

   [3242] Acts x. 44.

   [3243] 1 Cor. iv. 16, xi. 1.

   [3244] Phil. ii. 21.

   [3245] Matt. xxiii. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon L.

   [C. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke ix. 57, etc., where the case of the
   three persons is treated of, of whom one said, "I will follow thee
   whithersoever thou goest," and was disallowed: another did not dare to
   offer himself, and was aroused; the third wished to delay, and was
   blamed.

   1. Give ye ear to that which the Lord hath given me to speak on the
   lesson of the Gospel. For we have read, that the Lord Jesus acted
   differently, when one man offered himself to follow Him, and was
   disallowed; another did not dare this, and was aroused; a third put
   off, and was blamed. For the words, "Lord, I will follow Thee
   whithersoever Thou goest," [3246] what is so prompt, what so active,
   what so ready, and what so fitly disposed to so great a good, as this
   "following the Lord whithersoever He should go"? Thou wonderest at
   this, saying, "How is this, that one so ready found no favour with the
   Good Master and Lord Jesus Christ, though He was inviting disciples to
   give them the kingdom of Heaven?" But inasmuch as He was such a Master
   as could see beforehand things to come, we understand, Brethren, that
   this man, if he had followed Christ, would have been sure to "seek his
   own things, not the things which are Jesus Christ's." [3247] For He
   hath said Himself, "Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall
   enter into the kingdom of heaven." [3248] And of such was this man, nor
   did he know himself so well as the Physician knew him. For if he saw
   himself to be a dissembler now, if he had known himself at this time to
   be full of duplicity and guile, then he did not know with Whom he was
   speaking. For He it is of whom the Evangelist says, "He had no need
   that any one should testify to Him of man, for He Himself knew what was
   in man." [3249] What then did He answer? "Foxes have holes, and the
   birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man hath not where to lay
   His Head." [3250] But where hath He not? In thy faith. For in thy heart
   foxes have holes, thou art full of guile; in thy heart birds of the air
   have nests; thou art lifted up. Full of guile and self-elation as thou
   art, thou shalt not follow Me. How can a guileful man follow
   Simplicity?

   2. And then forthwith to another who was silent, and said nothing, and
   promised nothing, He saith, "Follow Me!" As much evil as He saw in the
   other, so much good saw He in this man. "Follow Me," [3251] Thou sayest
   to one who hath no wish for it. Lo, here is a man quite ready, "I will
   follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest;" and yet Thou sayest to another
   who hath no such wish, "Follow thou Me." "The first," saith He, "I
   decline, because I see in him holes, I see nests." "But then why dost
   Thou press this other, whom Thou dost challenge to follow Thee, and he
   makes excuses? Lo, Thou dost even force him, and he doth not come; Thou
   dost exhort him, and he doth not follow. For what doth he say? I will
   go first to bury my father.'" The faith of his heart showed itself to
   the Lord; but his dutiful affection made him delay. But the Lord Christ
   when He is preparing men for the Gospel, will have no excuse from this
   carnal and temporal affection interfere. It is true that both the law
   of God prescribes these duties, and the Lord Himself reproves the Jews,
   because they destroyed this very commandment of God. And the Apostle
   Paul has in his Epistle laid it down, and said, "This is the first
   commandment with promise." What? "Honour thy father and thy mother."
   [3252] God of a surety spake it. This young man then wished to obey
   God, and to bury his father; but it is place, and time, and
   circumstance, which is in this case to give way to place, and time, and
   circumstance. A father must be honoured, but God must be obeyed. He
   that begat us must be loved, but He that created us must be preferred.
   "I am calling thee," saith He, "to My Gospel; I have need of thee for
   another work: this is a greater work than that which thou wishest to be
   doing. Let the dead bury their dead.' [3253] Thy father is dead: there
   are other dead men to bury the dead." Who are the dead who bury the
   dead? Can a dead man be buried by dead men? How can they lay him out,
   if they are dead? How can they carry him, if they are dead? How can
   they bewail him, if they are dead? Yet they do lay him out, and carry,
   and bewail him, and they are dead; because they are unbelievers. That
   which is written in the Song of Songs is a lesson to us, when the
   Church says, "Set in order love in me." [3254] What is, "Set in order
   love in me"? Make the proper degrees, and render to each what is his
   due. Do not put what should come before, below that which should come
   after it. Love your parents, but prefer God to them. Mark the mother of
   the Maccabees, "My sons, I know not how ye appeared in my womb.' [3255]
   Conceive you I could, give you birth I could; but form you I could
   not:' hear Him therefore, prefer Him to me: trouble not yourselves,
   that I must remain here without you." Thus she commanded them, and they
   followed her. What this mother taught her children, did the Lord Jesus
   Christ teach him to whom He said, "Follow Me."

   3. See now how another disciple presented himself, to whom no one said
   anything: he said, "Lord, I will follow Thee, but I will first go to
   bid them farewell which are at my house." [3256] I suppose this is his
   meaning, "Let me tell my friends, lest haply they seek me as usual."
   And the Lord said, "No man putting his hand on the plough, and looking
   back, is fit for the kingdom of God." [3257] The East calls thee, and
   thou art looking toward the west. In this lesson we learn this, that
   the Lord chooses whom He will. But He chooses them, as the Apostle
   says, both according to His Own grace, and according to their
   righteousness. For such are the words of the Apostle; "Attend," he
   says, "to what Elias saith: Lord, they have killed Thy Prophets, they
   have overthrown Thine altars, and I am left alone, and they seek my
   life. But what saith the answer of God to him? I have reserved to
   Myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee before Baal."
   [3258] Thou thinkest that thou art the only servant who is working
   faithfully: there are others too who fear Me, and they not few. For I
   have "seven thousand" there. And then he added, "Even so then at this
   present time also." For some Jews believed, though the most were
   reprobate; like him who carried holes for foxes in his heart. "Even so
   then," saith he, "at this present time also, there is a remnant saved
   through the election of grace:" that is, there is the same Christ even
   now, as then, who also then said to that Elias, "I have reserved to
   Myself." What is, "I have reserved to Myself"? I have chosen them,
   because I saw their hearts that they trusted in Me, and not in
   themselves, nor in Baal. They are not changed, they are as they were
   made by Me. And thou who art speaking, except thou hadst placed thy
   trust in Me, where wouldest thou be? Except thou wert replenished by My
   grace, wouldest not thou too be bowing the knee before Baal? But thou
   art replenished by My grace; because thou hast not put thy trust at all
   in thine own strength, but wholly in My grace. Do not therefore glory
   in this, as to suppose thou hast no fellow-servants in thy service;
   there are others whom I have chosen, as I have chosen thee, those,
   namely, who put their trust in Me; as the Apostle says, "Even now also
   a remnant is saved through the election of grace."

   4. Beware, O Christian, beware of pride. For though thou art a follower
   of the saints, ascribe it always wholly to grace; for that there should
   be any "remnant" in thee, the grace of God hath brought to pass, not
   thine own deserts. For the Prophet Isaiah again having this remnant in
   view, had said already, "Except the Lord of Hosts had left us a seed,
   we should have become as Sodom, and should have been like unto
   Gomorrah." [3259] "So then," says the Apostle, "at this present time
   also a remnant is saved through the election of grace. But if by
   grace," says he, "then is it no more of works" (that is, "be now no
   more lifted up upon thine own deserts"); "otherwise grace is no more
   grace." [3260] For if thou dost build [3261] on thine own work; then is
   a reward rendered unto thee, not grace freely bestowed. But if it be
   grace, it is gratuitously given. I ask thee then, O sinner, "Dost thou
   believe in Christ?" Thou sayest, "I do believe." "What dost thou
   believe? That all thy sins may be forgiven thee freely through Him?"
   Then hast thou what thou hast believed. O grace gratuitously given! And
   thou, righteous man, what dost thou believe, that thou canst not keep
   thy righteousness without God? That thou art righteous then, impute it
   wholly to His mercy; but that thou art a sinner, ascribe it to thine
   own iniquity. Be thou thine own accuser, and He will be thy gracious
   Deliverer. For every crime, wickedness, or sin comes of our own
   negligence, and all virtue and holiness come of God's gracious
   goodness. "Let us turn to the Lord."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3246] Luke ix. 57.

   [3247] Phil. ii. 21.

   [3248] Matt. vii. 21.

   [3249] John ii. 25.

   [3250] Luke ix. 58.

   [3251] Luke ix. 59.

   [3252] Eph. vi. 2.

   [3253] Luke ix. 60.

   [3254] Cant. ii. 4, Sept.

   [3255] 2 Macc. vii. 22.

   [3256] Luke ix. 61.

   [3257] Luke ix. 62.

   [3258] Rom. xi. 3, etc.

   [3259] Isa. i. 9.

   [3260] Rom. xi. 5, 6.

   [3261] Præsumis.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LI.

   [CI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke x. 2, "The harvest truly is
   plenteous," etc.

   1. By the lesson of the Gospel which has just been read, we are
   reminded to search what that harvest is of which the Lord says, "The
   harvest truly is great, but the labourers are few. Pray ye the Lord of
   the harvest, that He would send forth labourers into His harvest."
   [3262] Then to His twelve disciples, whom He also named Apostles, He
   added other seventy-two, and sent them all, as appears from His words,
   to the harvest then ready. What then was that harvest? For that harvest
   was not among these Gentiles, among whom there had been nothing sown.
   It remains therefore that we understand that this harvest was among the
   people of the Jews. It was to that harvest that the Lord of the harvest
   came, to that harvest He sent reapers; but to the Gentiles He sent not
   reapers, but sowers. Understand we then that it was harvest among the
   people of the Jews, sowing time among the peoples of the Gentiles. For
   out of that harvest were the Apostles chosen, where now that the
   harvest was, the corn was already ripe; for there had the Prophets
   sown. Delightful it is to take a view of God's husbandry, and to feel
   delight in His gifts, and the labourers in His field. For in this
   husbandry did he labour, who said, "I laboured more than they all."
   [3263] But the strength to labour was given him by the Lord of the
   harvest. Therefore he added, "Yet it is not I, but the grace of God
   which is with me." For that he was employed in this husbandry he
   clearly enough shows, where he says, "I have planted, Apollos watered."
   [3264] But this Apostle, from Saul, becoming Paul, that is, from being
   proud, the least of all (for the name of Saul is derived from Saul; but
   Paul is little; whence in a way interpreting his own name, he says, "I
   am the least of the Apostles" [3265] : this Paul I say, the little, and
   the least, sent unto the Gentiles, says that he was sent particularly
   to the Gentiles. He himself so writes, we read, believe, preach it. He
   then in his Epistle to the Galatians says, that having been now called
   by the Lord Jesus, he came to Jerusalem, and "communicated the Gospel"
   [3266] unto the Apostles, that their right hands were given to him, the
   sign of harmony, the sign of agreement, that what they had learnt from
   him differed in no respect from them. Afterwards he says that it was
   agreed between him and them, that he should go to the Gentiles, and
   they unto the circumcision, he as a sower, they as reapers. So also
   with good reason, though they knew it not, did the Athenians give him
   his name. For as they heard the word from him, they said, "Who is this
   sower of words?" [3267]

   2. Attend then and be it your delight with me to take a view of the
   husbandry of God and the two harvests in it, the one already past, the
   other yet to come; the one already past among the people of the Jews,
   the one yet to come among the peoples of the Gentiles. Let us prove
   this; and whereby, but by the Scripture of God, the Lord of the
   harvest? See we have it said there in this present lesson, "The harvest
   is great, but the labourers are few. Pray ye the Lord of the harvest,
   that He would send forth labourers into His harvest." [3268] But
   because in that harvest there were to be gainsaying and persecuting
   Jews, He says, "Behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves." [3269]
   Let us show something clearer still touching this harvest in the Gospel
   according to John, where the Lord sat as He was wearied at the well,
   great mysteries [3270] indeed were transacted, but the time is too
   short to treat of them all. But give ye ear to that which relates to
   the present subject. For we have undertaken to show a harvest among the
   people, among whom the Prophets preached; for therefore were they
   sowers, that the Apostles might be reapers. A woman of Samaria talks
   with the Lord Jesus, and when the Lord among other things had told her
   how God ought to be worshipped, she says, "We know that Messias cometh
   who is called Christ, and He will teach us all things. And the Lord
   saith to her, I that speak with thee am He." [3271] Believe what thou
   hearest; why dost thou make search for what thou seest? "I that speak
   with thee am He." But as to what she had said, "We know that the
   Messias will come," whom Moses and the Prophets have announced, "who is
   called Christ." The harvest was already in the ear. When it had yet to
   grow it had received the Prophets as sowers, now that it was come to
   ripeness it waited for the Apostles as reapers. Presently as she heard
   this she believed and left her water-pot, and ran in haste, and began
   to announce the Lord. The disciples at that time had gone to buy bread;
   who on their return found the Lord talking with the woman, and they
   marvelled. Yet did they not dare to say to Him, "What or why talkest
   Thou with her?" [3272] They had astonishment in themselves, they
   repressed their boldness in their heart. To this Samaritan woman then
   the Name of Christ was nothing new, she was already waiting for His
   coming, already did she believe that He would come. Whence had she
   believed it, if Moses had not sown? But hear this more expressly noted.
   The Lord then said to His disciples, "Ye say that the summer is yet far
   distant, lift up your eyes, and see the fields white already to
   harvest" [3273] And then He adds, "Others have laboured, and ye are
   entered into their labours." [3274] Abraham laboured, Isaac, Jacob,
   Moses, the Prophets laboured in sowing; at the Lord's coming the
   harvest was found ripe. The reapers sent with the scythe of the Gospel,
   carried the sheaves into the Lord's floor, where Stephen was to be
   threshed.

   3. But here comes in that Paul, and he is sent to the Gentiles. And
   this he does not conceal in setting forth the grace, which he had
   specially and peculiarly received. For he says in his Scriptures, that
   he was sent to preach the Gospel where Christ had not been named.
   [3275] But because that first harvest was past already, and all the
   Jews who remained are no harvest, let us consider that harvest which we
   ourselves are. For it has been sown by Apostles and Prophets. The Lord
   Himself sowed it. For He was in the Apostles, seeing that Christ also
   Himself reaped it. For they are nothing without Him; He is perfect
   without them. For He saith Himself to them, "For without Me, ye can do
   nothing." [3276] What then doth Christ from henceforth sowing among the
   Gentiles say? "A sower went out to sow." [3277] "There" are reapers
   "sent out" to reap, "here" an unwearied sower "went out" to sow. For
   what fear did it cause him, that "some seed fell on the way side, and
   some on rocky places, and some among thorns"? If he had been afraid of
   these unmanageable [3278] grounds, he would never have got to the good
   ground. What is it to us, what affair of ours is it to be disputing now
   of the Jews, and talking of the chaff? this only concerns us, that we
   be not "the way side," nor "the rock," nor "the thorns," but "the good
   ground." Be our heart well-prepared, that from it may come the
   "thirty," or the "sixty fold," or the thousand, and the "hundred fold;"
   some more, some less; but all is wheat. Let it not be "the way side,"
   where the enemy as a bird may take away the seed trodden down by the
   passers by. Let it not be "the rock," where the shallow soil makes it
   spring up immediately, so that it cannot bear the sun. Let it not be
   the "thorns," the lusts of this world, the anxieties of an ill-ordered
   [3279] life. For what is worse than that anxiety of life, which doth
   not suffer one to attain unto Life? What more miserable, than by caring
   for life, to lose Life? What more unhappy, than by fearing death, to
   fall into death? Let the thorns be rooted up, the field prepared, the
   seeds put in, let them grow unto the harvest, let the barn be longed
   for, not the fire feared.

   4. My place accordingly it is, whom with all my unworthiness the Lord
   hath appointed to be a labourer in His field, to say these things to
   you, to sow, to plant, to water, yea to dig round about some trees, and
   to apply the basket of [3280] dung; belongeth it to me to do these
   things faithfully; to you to receive them faithfully; to the Lord to
   aid me in my labour, and you in your belief, all of us labouring, but
   in Him overcoming the world. What then belongs to your place I have
   already said; now I wish to say what belongs to ours. But peradventure
   it seems to some of you, that it is something superfluous which I have
   declared that I wish to say, and speaking within themselves they are
   saying in thought, "O that he would now let us go! He has said already
   what belongs to our place, as to that which belongs to his, what is
   that to us?" I think it is better that in a reciprocal and mutual love,
   we should belong to you. Ye are now indeed of one family, we of the
   same family are dispensers, it is true, but we all belong to one Lord.
   Nor what I give, do I give of mine own; but of His from whom I also
   receive. For if I should give of mine own, I shall give a lie. "For he
   that speaketh a lie, speaketh of his own." [3281] So then ye ought to
   give ear to that which belongs to the duty of the dispenser, whether it
   be that ye may have joy in yourselves, if ye find yourselves to be
   such, or whether it be that ye may be even in this very thing
   instructed. For how many are there among this people who shall some day
   be dispensers! I too was once where ye now are; and I who am seen now
   to be measuring out to my fellowservants their food from this higher
   place, a few years since in a lower place was receiving food with my
   fellow-servants. I am speaking now a Bishop to lay-men; but I know that
   in speaking to them I am speaking to many who will some day be bishops
   also.

   5. Let us see then how we must understand what the Lord enjoined on
   them whom He sent to preach the Gospel, and let us consider in our mind
   this prepared harvest. "Carry," He saith, "neither purse, nor scrip,
   nor shoes; and salute no man by the way. And into whatsoever house ye
   enter, say, Peace be to this house. If the Son of peace be there, your
   peace shall rest upon it; if not, it shall return to you again." [3282]
   If it hath "rested," hath the other lost it? This be far from the mind
   of Saints! So then this is not to be taken in a carnal sense; and hence
   it may be neither are the "purse," nor "shoes," nor "scrip;" nor above
   all that, where if we take it simply without examination, pride seems
   to be enjoined us, that we "salute no man by the way."

   6. Let us give heed to our Lord, our True Example and Succour. Let us
   prove that He is our Succour; "Without Me ye can do nothing." [3283]
   Let us prove that He is our Example; "Christ," says Peter, "suffered
   for us, leaving us an example that we should follow His steps." [3284]
   Our Lord Himself had bags in the way, and these bags He entrusted to
   Judas. It is true He suffered from the thief; but I as desiring to
   learn of my Lord say, "O Lord, Thou didst suffer from the thief, whence
   hadst Thou that of which he could take away? Me, a wretched and infirm
   man Thou hast admonished not even to carry a purse; Thou didst carry
   bags, and hadst that in which Thou couldest suffer from the thief. If
   Thou hadst not carried them, neither could he have found anything to
   take away." What remains, but that he here saith to me, "Understand
   what that thou hearest, Carry no purse,' means? What is a purse? Money
   shut up, that is, concealed wisdom. What is, Carry no purse? Be not
   wise within your own selves only. [3285] Receive ye the Holy Ghost.' It
   should be a fountain in thee, not a purse; from whence distribution is
   made to others, not where it is itself shut in." And the scrip is the
   same as the purse.

   7. What are "the shoes"? The shoes which we use, are the skins of dead
   beasts, the coverings of our feet. By this then are we bidden to
   renounce dead works. This Moses was admonished of in a figure, when the
   Lord speaking to him said, "Loose thy shoes from off thy feet; for the
   place wherein thou standest is holy ground." [3286] What ground is so
   holy as the Church of God? In it therefore let us stand, let us loose
   our shoes, let us, that is, renounce dead works. For as touching these
   shoes, wherewith we walk, the same my Lord again assures me. For if He
   had not been shod Himself, John would not have said of Him, "I am not
   worthy to unloose the latchet of His shoes." [3287] Be there obedience
   then, let not a haughty severity steal over us. "I," says one, "fulfil
   the Gospel, because I walk with naked feet." Well, thou canst do it, I
   cannot. But let us both keep that which we both receive together. How?
   Let us glow with charity, let us love one another; and so it shall be,
   that I will love your strength, and thou shall bear my weakness.

   8. But what thinkest thou, who dost not choose to understand in what
   sense these words are used, and who art forced by thy [3288] perverse
   interpretation to slander even the Lord Himself as to the "bags" and
   "shoes;" what thinkest thou? Does it please thee then, that as we meet
   our friends in the way, we should neither pay them our salutations if
   they are our betters, nor return the salutations of our inferiors?
   What, dost thou fulfil the Gospel, because thou art saluted, and art
   silent? But thus thou wilt not be like to the traveller going on the
   way, but to the milestone pointing out the way. Let us then lay aside
   this coarse [3289] interpretation, and understand aright the words of
   the Lord, "and salute no man by the way." For it is not without a cause
   that we are enjoined this, nor would He mislike us to do what He
   enjoined. What then is, "Salute no man by the way"? It might indeed be
   even simply taken thus, that He has commanded us to do what He enjoins
   with all speed; and that His words "Salute no man by the way," are as
   though He had said, "Put all other things by, till ye accomplish what
   has been enjoined you;" according to that style of speaking by which
   expressions are wont to be exaggerated in the custom of conversation.
   Nor need we go far; in the same discourse a little while afterwards He
   says, "And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shall be
   thrust down to hell." [3290] What is, "exalted to heaven"? Did the
   walls of that city touch the clouds, or reach to the stars? But what is
   "exalted to heaven"? Thou seemest thyself to be surpassing happy,
   surpassing powerful, thou art exceeding proud. As then for the sake of
   exaggeration this was said, "Thou art exalted unto heaven" to that
   city, which was not exalted, nor rose up unto heaven; so to express
   haste hyperbolically was it said, "So run, so do what I have enjoined
   you, that travellers by the way may not in the least retard you; but
   disregarding all things else, hasten to the end set before you."

   9. But there is another more recondite meaning in these words which it
   is not difficult to understand, which respects more particularly myself
   and all dispensers, and you too who are hearers. He that salutes,
   wishes salvation. [3291] For so the ancients in their letters wrote
   thus, "Such a one sends salvation to another." Salutation derives its
   name from this salvation. What then is, "Salute no man by the way"?
   They who "salute by the way," do so "by occasion." I see that ye have
   quickly understood me, yet for all that I must not finish yet. For ye
   have not all understood so quickly. I have seen that some understand by
   their voice, I see more asking for something further by their silence.
   But seeing that we are talking of the way, let us walk as it were in
   the way: ye quick ones, wait for the slow, and walk evenly. What then
   did I say, He "who salutes by the way," salutes only by occasion? He
   was not going to him whom he salutes. He was about one thing, another
   came in his way; he was seeking one thing, he found across his path
   some other thing to do. What then is it to "salute by occasion"? "By
   occasion" to announce salvation. Now what else is it to announce
   salvation, but to preach the Gospel? If then thou dost preach, do it by
   love, and not "by occasion." There are men then, who though "they seek
   their own things," yet preach no other Gospel; of whom the Apostle says
   with sighing, "For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
   Christ's." [3292] And these "saluted," that is announced salvation,
   they preached the Gospel; but they sought some other thing, and
   therefore they saluted only "by occasion." And what is this? If thou
   art such an one, whosoever thou art, thou doest it; nay not all of you
   who do it are such, but it may be that some of you who do it are. But
   if thou art such, it is not that thou doest it, but it is done by thee.

   10. For such as these did the Apostle suffer; yet did he not enjoin
   them so to be. And these do something, or something is done by them;
   they seek something else, yet they preach the word. Care not what the
   preacher seeks after; be it thy will to hold fast what he preaches; but
   let his intention be no concern of thine. Hear the word of salvation
   from his mouth, from his mouth hold fast this salvation. Be not thou
   the judge of his heart. If thou seest that he is seeking after other
   things, what is that to thee? Hear Him who is Salvation; [3293] "What
   they say, do." [3294] He has given thee assurance who hath said, "What
   they say, do." Do they evil? "Do not what they do." Do they good. They
   do not "salute by the way," they do not preach the Gospel by occasion;
   "be ye followers of them, even as they also are of Christ." [3295] A
   good man preaches to thee; pluck the grape from the vine. A bad man
   preaches to thee, pluck the grape as it hangs in the hedge. The cluster
   has grown on the vine-branch entangled among the thorns, but it has not
   grown from the thorns. By all means when thou seest any such thing as
   this and art hungry, be careful as thou pluckest it, lest when thou
   puttest forth thy hand to the grape, thou be torn by the thorns. This
   is what I say; in such wise hear what is good, as that thou imitate not
   the evil of the character. Let him preach "by occasion," salute by the
   way; it will injure him because he has not given ear to the precept of
   Christ, "Salute no man by the way;" it will not injure thee, who,
   whether thou dost hear of salvation [3296] from a passer by, or from
   one who comes direct to thee, dost hold fast that salvation. Hear the
   Apostle, who as I have said already gives us to understand this. "What
   then?" "So that in every way, whether by occasion or in truth, Christ
   is preached; and herein I do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice. For I know
   that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer." [3297]

   11. Let then such as these, the Apostles of Christ, the preachers of
   the Gospel, who "salute not by the way," that is, who do not seek or do
   any other thing, but who in genuine charity preach the Gospel, let them
   come into the house, and say, "Peace to this house." They speak not
   with the mouth only; they pour out that of which they are full; they
   preach peace, and they have peace. They are not as those of whom it was
   said, "Peace, Peace, and there is no peace." [3298] What is, "Peace,
   Peace, and there is no peace"? They preach it, but they have it not;
   they praise it and they love it not; they say, and do not. But yet do
   thou receive the peace, "whether by occasion or in truth Christ be
   preached." Whoso then is full of peace, and salutes, saying, "Peace to
   this house, if the son of peace be there, his peace shall rest upon
   him; if not," for peradventure there is no one of peace there, yet he
   who saluted has lost nothing, "it shall return," says he, "to you
   again." It shall return to thee, though it never departed from thee.
   For this He would mean to say, It profiteth thee that thou hast
   declared it, it hath not profited him at all who hath not received it;
   thou hast not lost thy reward, because he hath remained empty; it is
   rendered thee for thy good will, it is rendered thee for the charity
   which thou hast bestowed, He will render it to thee who hath given thee
   assurance of it by that Angelic voice, "Peace on earth to men of good
   will." [3299]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3262] Luke x. 2.

   [3263] 1 Cor. xv. 10.

   [3264] 1 Cor. iii. 6.

   [3265] 1 Cor. xv. 9.

   [3266] Gal. ii. 1, etc.

   [3267] Acts xvii. 18. spermologos.

   [3268] Luke x. 2.

   [3269] Luke x. 3.

   [3270] Sacramenta.

   [3271] John iv. 25, 26.

   [3272] John iv. 27.

   [3273] John iv. 35.

   [3274] John iv. 38.

   [3275] Rom. xv. 20.

   [3276] John xv. 5.

   [3277] Luke viii. 5.

   [3278] Difficiles.

   [3279] Vitiosæ.

   [3280] i.e. to appoint the exercises of penance; see Sermon lx. (cx.
   Ben) (i.).

   [3281] John viii. 44.

   [3282] Luke x. 4-6.

   [3283] John xv. 5.

   [3284] 1 Pet. ii. 21.

   [3285] Rom. xii. 16.

   [3286] Exod. iii. 5.

   [3287] Luke iii. 16.

   [3288] Praviter.

   [3289] Stoliditatem.

   [3290] Luke x. 15.

   [3291] Salutem.

   [3292] Phil. ii. 21.

   [3293] Salutem.

   [3294] Matt. xxiii. 3.

   [3295] 1 Cor. iv. 16, xi. 1; Sermon xxiv. (lxxiv. Ben.) 4.

   [3296] Salutem.

   [3297] Phil i. 18, 19. prophasei; per occasionem, Vulgate.

   [3298] Jer. viii. 11.

   [3299] Luke ii. 14, Vulg.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LII.

   [CII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke x. 16, "He that rejecteth you
   rejecteth me."

   1. What our Lord Jesus Crist at that time spake to His disciples was
   put in writing, and prepared for us to hear. And so we have heard His
   words. For what profit would it be to us if He were seen, and were not
   heard? And now it is no hurt, that He is not seen, and yet is heard. He
   saith then, "He that despiseth you, despiseth Me." [3300] If to the
   Apostles only He said, "He that despiseth you, despiseth Me;" do ye
   despise us. But if His word reach to us, and He hath called us, and set
   us in their place, see that ye despise not us, lest the wrong ye shall
   do unto us reach to Him. For if ye fear not us, fear Him who said, "He
   that despiseth you, despiseth Me." But why do we, who are unwilling to
   be despised by you, speak to you, except that we may have joy of your
   good conversation? Let your good works be the solace of our perils.
   Live well, that ye may not die ill.

   2. And in these words which I have spoken, "Live well, that ye may not
   die ill," do not think of those who it may be have lived evilly, and
   have died in their beds; and the pomp of their funeral has been
   displayed, and they have been laid in costly coffins, in sepulchres
   prepared with exceeding beauty and labour; nor because each one of you
   perhaps is saying, "I should wish so to die," do ye think that it is a
   vain thing I have chosen to say; when I said that I would that ye
   should live well, that ye may not die ill? On the other hand, the case
   of some one, it may be, occurs to you, who has both lived well, and
   according to the opinion of men has died ill; perhaps he has died from
   the fall of a house, has died by shipwreck, has died by wild beasts;
   and each carnal man is saying in his heart, "What good is it to live
   well? See this man has so lived, and in this wise has he died." "Return
   therefore to your heart;" and if ye are faithful ones, ye will find
   Christ there; He speaketh to you there. For I cry aloud, but He in
   silence giveth more instruction. I speak by the sound of words; He
   speaketh within by the fear of the thoughts. May He then engraft my
   word in your heart; for I have taken upon me to say, "Live well, that
   ye may not die ill." See, for faith is in your hearts, and Christ
   dwelleth there, and it is His place to teach what I desire to give
   utterance to.

   3. Remember that rich and that poor man in the Gospel; "the rich man
   clothed in purple and fine linen," and crammed with daily feastings;
   and the poor man "lying before" the rich man's gate, hungry, and
   looking for "the crumbs from his table, full of sores, licked" by
   "dogs." [3301] Remember, I say; and whence do ye remember, but because
   Christ is there in your hearts? Tell me, what have ye asked Him within,
   and what hath He answered. For he goes on to say, "It came to pass that
   that poor man died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.
   The rich man also died, and was buried in hell. And being in torments
   he lifted up his eyes, and saw Lazarus resting in Abraham's bosom. Then
   he cried, saying, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus
   that he may dip his finger in water, and drop it on my tongue, for I am
   tormented in this flame." [3302] Proud in the world, [3303] in hell a
   beggar! For that poor man did attain to his crumbs; but the other
   attained not to the drop of water. Of these two then, tell me, which
   died well, and which died ill? Do not ask the eyes, return to the
   heart. For if ye ask the eyes, they will answer you falsely. For vastly
   splendid, and disguised with much worldly show, are the honours which
   could be paid to that rich man in his death. What crowds of mourning
   slaves and handmaids might there be! what pompous train of dependants!
   what splendid funeral obsequies! what costliness of burial! I suppose
   he was overwhelmed with spices. What shall we say then, Brethren, that
   he died well, or died ill? If ye ask the eyes, he died very well; if ye
   enquire of your inner Master, he died most ill.

   4. If then those haughty men who keep their own goods to themselves,
   and bestow none of them upon the poor, die in this way; how do they die
   who plunder the goods of others? Therefore have I said with true
   reason, "Live well, that ye die not ill," that ye die not as that rich
   man died. Nothing proves an evil death, but the time after death. On
   the other hand, look at that poor man; not with the eyes, for so ye
   will err; let faith look at him, let the heart see him. Set him before
   your eyes lying on the ground, "full of sores, and the dogs" coming and
   "licking his sores." Now when ye recall him before your eyes in this
   guise, immediately ye loathe him, ye turn your face away, and stop your
   nostrils: see then with the eyes of the heart. "He died, and was
   carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom." The rich man's family was
   seen bewailing him; the Angels were not seen rejoicing. What then did
   Abraham answer the rich man? "Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime
   receivedst good things." [3304] Thou thoughtest nothing good, but what
   thou hadst in this life. Thou hast received them; but those days are
   past; and thou hast lost the whole; and thou hast remained behind to be
   tormented in hell."

   5. Opportune then was it, Brethren, that those words should be spoken
   to you. Have respect unto the poor, whether lying on the ground, or
   walking; have respect unto the poor, do good works. Ye who are wont so
   to do, do it still and ye who are not wont to do so, do it now. Let the
   number of those who do good works increase; since the number of the
   faithful increases also. Ye do not yet see how great is the good ye do;
   for so the husbandman also sees not the crop when he sows, but he
   trusts the ground. Wherefore dost thou not trust God? Our harvest will
   come. Think, that we are busy in travail now, are working in travail
   now, but sure to receive, as it is written, "They went on and wept as
   they cast their seed; but they shall surely come with exultation,
   bringing their sheaves with them." [3305]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3300] Luke x. 16.

   [3301] Luke xvi. 19, etc.

   [3302] Luke xvi. 22-24.

   [3303] Temporis.

   [3304] Luke xvi. 25.

   [3305] Ps. cxxv. 6, Sept. (cxxvi. English version).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LIII.

   [CIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke x. 38, "And a certain woman named
   Martha received him into her house," etc.

   1. The words of our Lord Jesus Christ which have just been read out of
   the Gospel, give us to understand, that there is some one thing for
   which we must be making, when we toil amid the manifold engagements of
   this life. Now we make for this as being yet in pilgrimage, and not in
   our abiding place; as yet in the way, not yet in our country; as yet in
   longing, not yet in enjoyment. Yet let us make for it, and that without
   sloth and without intermission, that we may some time be able to reach
   it.

   2. Martha and Mary were two sisters, true kinswomen both, not only in
   blood, but in religion also; both clave to the Lord, both with one
   heart served the Lord when He was present in the flesh. Martha received
   Him, as strangers are usually received. Yet it was the handmaid
   received her Lord, the sick her Saviour, the creature her Creator. And
   she received Him to be fed in the body, herself to be fed in spirit.
   For the Lord was pleased to "take on Him the form of a servant," [3306]
   and "having taken the form of a servant" in it to be fed by servants,
   by reason of His condescension, not His condition. For this truly was
   condescension, to allow Himself to be fed by others. He had a body,
   wherein He might hunger indeed and thirst; but do ye not know that when
   He hungered in the wilderness Angels ministered to Him? [3307] So then,
   in that He was pleased to be fed, He showed favour to them that fed
   Him. And what marvel is this, seeing He showed this same favour to the
   widow as touching the Holy Elias, whom He had before fed by the
   ministry of a raven? [3308] Did He fail in His power of feeding him,
   when He sent him to the widow? By no means. He did not fail in His
   power of feeding him, when He sent him to the widow; but He designed to
   bless the religious widow, by means of her pious office paid to His
   servant. Thus then was the Lord received as a guest, "who came unto His
   own, and His own received Him not: but as many as received Him, to them
   gave He power to become the sons of God:" [3309] adopting servants, and
   making them brethren; redeeming captives, and making them co-heirs. Yet
   let none of you, as perhaps may be the case, say, "O blessed they who
   obtained the grace [3310] to receive Christ into their own house!" Do
   not grieve, do not murmur, that thou wert born in times when thou seest
   the Lord no more in the flesh; He has not taken this blessedness from
   thee. "Forasmuch," says He, "as ye have done it unto the least of Mine,
   ye have done unto Me." [3311]

   3. These few words, as the shortness of the time allowed me, would I
   speak concerning the Lord who was pleased to be fed in the flesh, while
   He feedeth in the spirit: let us now come to the subject which I have
   proposed concerning unity. Martha, who was arranging and preparing to
   feed the Lord, was occupied about much serving. Mary her sister chose
   rather to be fed by the Lord. She in a manner deserted her sister who
   was toiling about much serving, and she sat herself at the Lord's feet,
   and in stillness heard His word. Her most faithful ear had heard
   already; "Be still, and see that I am the Lord." [3312] Martha was
   troubled, Mary was feasting; the one was arranging many things, the
   other had her eyes upon the One. Both occupations were good; but yet as
   to which was the better, what shall we say? We have One whom we may
   ask, let us give ear together. Which was the better, we heard now when
   the lesson was read, and let us hear again as I repeat it. Martha
   appeals to her Guest, lays the request of her pious complaints before
   the Judge, that her sister had deserted her, and neglected to assist
   her when she was so busied in her serving. Without any answer from
   Mary, yet in her presence, the Lord gives judgment. Mary preferred as
   in repose to commit her cause to the Judge, and had no mind to busy
   herself in making answer. For if she were to be getting ready words to
   answer, she must remit her earnest attention to hear. Therefore the
   Lord answered, who was in no difficulty for words, in that He was the
   Word. What then did He say? "Martha, Martha." [3313] The repetition of
   the name is a token of love, or perhaps of exciting attention; she is
   named twice, that she might give the more attentive heed. "Martha,
   Martha," hear: "Thou art occupied about many things: but one thing is
   needful;" [3314] for so meaneth unum opus est, not "one work," that is,
   one single work, but one is needful, is expedient, is necessary, which
   one thing Mary had chosen. [3315]

   4. Consider, Brethren, this "one thing," and see if even in multitude
   itself anything pleases, but "this oneness." See how great a number,
   through God's mercy, ye are: who could bear you, if ye did not mind
   "one thing"? Whence in this many is this quiet? Give oneness, and it is
   a people; take oneness away, and it is a crowd. For what is a crowd,
   but a disordered multitude? But give ear to the Apostle: "Now I beseech
   you, brethren." He was speaking to a multitude; but he wished to make
   them all "one." "Now I beseech you, brethren, that ye all speak the
   same thing, and that there be no schisms among you; but that ye be
   perfected in the same mind, and in the same knowledge." [3316] And in
   another place, "That ye be of one mind, thinking one thing, doing
   nothing through strife or vainglory." [3317] And the Lord prays to the
   Father touching them that are His: "that they may be one even as We are
   One." [3318] And in the Acts of the Apostles; "And the multitude of
   them that believed were of one soul, and of one heart." [3319]
   Therefore, "Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name in one
   together." [3320] For one thing is necessary, that celestial [3321]
   Oneness, the Oneness in which the Father, and the Son, and Holy Spirit
   are One. See how the praise of Unity is commended to us. Undoubtedly
   our God is Trinity. The Father is not the Son the Son is not the
   Father, the Holy Spirit is neither the Father, nor the Son, but the
   Spirit of both; and yet these Three are not Three Gods, nor Three
   Almighties; but One God, Almighty, the whole Trinity is one God;
   because One thing is necessary. To this one thing nothing brings us,
   except being many we have one heart.

   5. Good are ministrations done to the poor, and especially the due
   services and the religious offices done to the saints of God. For they
   are a payment, not a gift, as the Apostle says, "If we have sown unto
   you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal
   things?" [3322] Good are they, we exhort you to them, yea by the word
   of the Lord we build you up, "be not slow to entertain" the saints.
   Sometimes, they who were not aware of it, by entertaining those whom
   they knew not, have entertained angels. [3323] These things are good;
   yet better is that thing which Mary hath chosen. For the one thing hath
   manifold trouble from necessity; the other hath sweetness from charity.
   A man wishes when he is serving, to meet with something; and sometimes
   he is not able: that which is lacking is sought for, that which is at
   hand is got ready; and the mind is distracted. For if Martha had been
   sufficient for these things, she would not have demanded her sister's
   help. These things are manifold, are diverse, because they are carnal,
   because they are temporal; good though they be, they are transitory.
   But what said theLord to Martha? "Mary hath chosen that better part."
   Not thou a bad, but she a better. Hear, how better; "which shall not be
   taken away from her." [3324] Some time or other, the burden of these
   necessary duties shall be taken from thee: the sweetness of truth is
   everlasting. "That which she hath chosen shall not be taken away from
   her." It is not taken away, but yet it is increased. In this life, that
   is, is it increased, in the other life it will be perfected, never
   shall it be "taken away."

   6. Yea, Martha, blessed in thy good serving, even thou (with thy leave
   would I say it) seekest this reward for all thy labour--quiet. Now thou
   art occupied about much serving, thou hast pleasure in feeding bodies
   which are mortal, though they be the bodies of Saints; but when thou
   shalt have got to that country, wilt thou find there any stranger whom
   thou mayest receive into thine house? wilt thou find the hungry, to
   whom thou mayest break thy bread? or the thirsty, to whom thou mayest
   hold out thy cup? the sick whom thou mayest visit? the litigious, whom
   thou mayest set at one? the dead, whom thou mayest bury? None of all
   these will be there, but what will be there? What Mary hath chosen;
   there shall we be fed, and shall not feed others. Therefore there will
   that be in fulness and perfection which Mary hath chosen here; from
   that rich table, from the word of the Lord did she gather up some
   crumbs. For would ye know what will be there? The Lord Himself saith of
   His servants: "Verily I say unto you, that He will make them to sit
   down to meat, and will pass by [3325] and serve them." [3326] What is
   "to sit down to meat," but to "be still"? What is, "to sit down to
   meat," but to rest? What is, "He will pass by and serve them"? First,
   He passeth by, and so serveth. And where? In that heavenly Banquet, of
   which he saith, "Verily I say unto you, Many shall come from the East
   and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the
   kingdom of heaven." [3327] There will the Lord feed us, but first He
   passeth on from hence. For (as ye should know) the Pasch is by
   interpretation Passing-over. The Lord came, He did divine things, He
   suffered human things. Is He still spit upon? Is He still struck with
   the palm of the hand? Is He still crowned with thorns? Is He still
   scourged? Is He still crucified? Is He still wounded with a spear? "He
   hath passed by." And so too the Gospel tells us, when He kept the
   Paschal feast with His disciples. What says the Gospel? "But when the
   hour was come that Jesus should pass out of this world unto the
   Father." [3328] Therefore did He pass, [3329] that He might feed us;
   let us follow, that we may be fed.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3306] Phil. ii. 7.

   [3307] Matt. iv. 11.

   [3308] 1 Kings xvii. 6.

   [3309] John i. 11, 12.

   [3310] Meruerunt.

   [3311] Matt. xxv. 40.

   [3312] Ps. xlvi. 10.

   [3313] Luke x. 41.

   [3314] Luke x. 42.

   [3315] St. Augustin is explaining the words unum opus est, which in
   themselves might mean, "there is one work," or as in the text.

   [3316] 1 Cor. i. 10.

   [3317] Phil. ii. 2, 3.

   [3318] John xvii. 22.

   [3319] Acts iv. 32.

   [3320] Ps. xxxiv. 3.

   [3321] Supernum.

   [3322] 1 Cor. ix. 11.

   [3323] Heb. xiii. 2.

   [3324] Luke x. 42.

   [3325] parelthon; transiens, Vulgate.

   [3326] Luke xii. 37.

   [3327] Matt. viii. 11.

   [3328] John xiii. 1.

   [3329] metabe; transeat, Vulgate.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LIV.

   [CIV. Ben.]

   Again, on the words of the Gospel, Luke x. 38, etc., about Martha and
   Mary.

   1. When the holy Gospel was being read, we heard that the Lord was
   received by a religious woman into her house, and her name was Martha.
   And while she was occupied in the care of serving, her sister Mary was
   sitting at the Lord's Feet, and hearing His Word. The one was busy, the
   other was still; one was giving out, the other was being filled. Yet
   Martha, all busy as she was in that occupation and toil of serving,
   appealed to the Lord, and complained of her sister, that she did not
   help her in her labour. But the Lord answered Martha for Mary; and He
   became her Advocate, who had been appealed to as Judge. "Martha," He
   saith, "thou art occupied about many things, when one thing is
   necessary. Mary hath chosen the better part, which shall not be taken
   from her." [3330] For we have heard both the appeal of the appellant,
   and the sentence of the Judge. Which sentence answered the appellant,
   defended the other's cause. For Mary was intent on the sweetness of the
   Lord's word. Martha was intent, how she might feed the Lord; Mary
   intent how she might be fed by the Lord. By Martha a feast was being
   prepared for the Lord, in whose feast Mary was even now delighting
   herself. As Mary then was listening with sweet pleasure to His most
   sweet word, and was feeding with the most earnest affection, when the
   Lord was appealed to by her sister, how, think we, did she fear, lest
   the Lord should say to her, "Rise and help thy sister"? For by a
   wondrous sweetness was she held; a sweetness of the mind which is
   doubtless greater than that of the senses. [3331] She was excused, she
   sat in greater confidence. And how excused? Let us consider, examine,
   investigate it thoroughly as we can, that we may be fed also.

   2. For what, do we imagine that Martha's serving was blamed, whom the
   cares of hospitality had engaged, who had received the Lord Himself
   into her house? How could she be rightly blamed, who was gladdened by
   so great a guest? If this be true, let men give over their
   ministrations to the needy; let them choose for themselves "the better
   part, which shall not be taken from" them; let them give themselves
   [3332] wholly to the word, let them long after the sweetness of
   doctrine; be occupied about the saving knowledge; let it be no care to
   them, what stranger is in the street, who there is that wants bread, or
   clothing, or to be visited, to be redeemed, to be buried; let works of
   mercy cease, earnest heed be given to knowledge only. If this be "the
   better part," why do not all do this, when we have the Lord Himself for
   our defender in this behalf? For we do not fear in this matter, lest we
   should offend His justice, when we have the support of His judgment.

   3. And yet it is not so; but as the Lord spake so it is. It is not as
   thou understandest; but it is as thou oughtest to understand it. So
   mark; "Thou art occupied about many things, when one thing is needful.
   Mary hath chosen the better part." Thou hast not chosen a bad part; but
   she a better. And how better? Because thou art "about many things," she
   about "one thing." One is preferred to many. For one does not come from
   many, but many from one.

   The things which were made, are many, He who made them is One. The
   heaven, the earth, the sea, and all things that in them are, how many
   are they! Who could enumerate them? who conceive their vast number? Who
   made all these? God made them all. Behold, "they are very good." [3333]
   Very good are the things He made; how much better is He who made them!
   Let us consider then our "occupations about many things." Much serving
   is necessary for the refreshment of our bodies. Wherefore is this?
   Because we hunger, and thirst. Mercy is necessary for the miserable.
   Thou breakest bread to the hungry; because thou hast found an hungry
   man; take hunger away; to whom dost thou break bread? Take houseless
   wandering [3334] away; to whom dost thou show hospitality? Take
   nakedness away; to whom dost thou furnish clothes? Let there be no
   sickness; whom dost thou visit? No captivity; whom dost thou redeem? No
   quarrelling; whom dost thou reconcile? No death; whom dost thou bury?
   In that world to come, these evils will not be; therefore these
   services will not be either. Well then did Martha, as touching the
   bodily--what shall I call it, want, or will, of the Lord?--minister to
   His mortal flesh. But who was He in that mortal flesh? "In the
   beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
   God:" [3335] see what Mary was listening to! "The Word was made flesh,
   and dwelt among us:" [3336] see to whom Martha was ministering!
   Therefore "hath Mary chosen the better part, which shall not be taken
   from her." For she chose that which shall abide for ever; "it shall not
   be taken from her." She wished to be occupied about "one thing." She
   understood already, "But it is good for me to cleave to the Lord."
   [3337] She sat at the feet of our Head. The more lowlily she sat, the
   more amply did she receive. For the water flows together to the low
   hollows of the valley, runs down from the risings of the hill. The Lord
   then did not blame Martha's work, but distinguished between their
   services. "Thou art occupied about many things; yet one thing is
   needful." Already hath Mary chosen this for herself. The labour of
   manifoldness passeth away, and the love of unity abideth. Therefore
   what she hath chosen, "shall not be taken from her." But from thee,
   that which thou hast chosen (of course this follows, of course this is
   understood) from thee, that which thou hast chosen shall be taken away.
   But to thy blessedness shall it be taken away, that that which is
   better may be given. For labour shall be taken away from thee, that
   rest may be given. Thou art still on the sea, she is already in port.

   4. Ye see then, dearly Beloved, and, as I suppose, ye understand
   already, that in these two women, who were both well pleasing to the
   Lord, both objects of His love, both disciples; ye see, I say (and an
   important thing it is which whosoever understand, understand hereby, a
   thing which, even those of you who do not understand ought to give ear
   to, and to know), that in these two women the two lives are figured,
   the life present, and the life to come, the life of labour, and the
   life of quiet, the life of sorrow, and the life of blessedness, the
   life temporal, and the life eternal. These are the two lives: do ye
   think of them more fully. What this life contains, I speak not of a
   life of evil, or iniquity, or wickedness, or luxuriousness, or
   ungodliness; but of labour, and full of sorrows, by fears subdued, by
   temptations disquieted: even this harmless life I mean, such as was
   suitable for Martha: this life I say, examine as best ye can; and as I
   have said, think of it more fully than I speak. But a wicked life was
   far from that house, and was neither with Martha nor with Mary; and if
   it ever had been, it fled at the Lord's entrance. There remained then
   in that house, which had received the Lord, in the two women the two
   lives, both harmless, both praiseworthy; the one of labour, the other
   of ease; neither vicious, neither slothful. Both harmless, both, I say,
   praiseworthy: but one of labour, the other of ease: neither vicious,
   which the life of labour must beware of; neither slothful, which the
   life of ease must beware of. There were then in that house these two
   lives, and Himself, the Fountain of life. In Martha was the image of
   things present, in Mary of things to come. What Martha was doing, that
   we are now; what Mary was doing, that we hope for. Let us do the first
   well, that we may have the second fully. For what of it have we now?
   How far have we it? As long as we are here, how much of it is there
   that we have? For in some measure are we employed in it now, and ye too
   when removed from business, and laying aside domestic cares, ye meet
   together, stand, listen. In so far as ye do this, ye are like Mary. And
   with greater facility do ye do that which Mary doeth, than I who have
   to distribute. Yet if I say ought, it is Christ's; therefore doth it
   feed you, because it is Christ's. For the Bread is common to us all, of
   which I too live as well as you. "But now we live, if ye, Brethren,
   stand fast in the Lord." [3338] I would not that ye should stand fast
   in us, but in the Lord. "For neither is he that planteth anything,
   neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase." [3339]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3330] Luke x. 41, 42.

   [3331] Ventris.

   [3332] Vacent.

   [3333] Gen. i. 31.

   [3334] Peregrinationem.

   [3335] John i. 1.

   [3336] John i. 14.

   [3337] Ps. lxxiii. 28.

   [3338] 1 Thess. iii. 8.

   [3339] 1 Cor. iii. 7.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LV.

   [CV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xi. 5, "Which of you shall have a
   friend, and shall go unto him at midnight," etc.

   1. We have heard our Lord, the Heavenly Master, and most faithful
   Counsellor exhorting us, who at once exhorteth us to ask, and giveth
   when we ask. We have heard Him in the Gospel exhorting us to ask
   instantly, and to knock even after the likeness of intrusive
   importunity. For He has set before us, for the sake of example, "If any
   of you had a friend, and were to ask of him at night for three loaves,
   [3340] when a friend out of his way had come to him, and he had nothing
   to set before him; and he were to answer that he was now at rest, and
   his servants with him, and that he must not be disturbed by his
   entreaties; but the other were to be instant and persevering in
   knocking, and not being alarmed in modesty to depart, but compelled by
   necessity to continue on; that he would rise, though not for
   friendship's sake, at least for the other's importunity, and would give
   him as many as he wished." And how many did he wish? He wished for no
   more than three. To this parable then, the Lord adjoined an
   exhortation, and urged us earnestly to ask, seek, knock, till we
   receive what we ask, and seek, and knock for, making use of an example
   from a contrary case; as of that "judge who neither feared God, nor
   regarded man," [3341] and yet when a certain widow besought him day by
   day, overcome by her importunity, he gave her that which he could not
   in kindness give her, against his will. But our Lord Jesus Christ, who
   is in the midst of us a Petitioner, with God a Giver, would not surely
   exhort us so strongly to ask, if He were not willing to give. Let then
   the slothfulness of men be put to shame; He is more willing to give,
   than we to receive; He is more willing to show mercy, than we to be
   delivered from misery; and doubtless if we shall not be delivered, we
   shall abide in misery. For the exhortation He giveth us, He giveth only
   for our own sakes.

   2. Let us awake, and believe Him who exhorteth us, obey Him who
   promiseth us, and rejoice in Him who giveth unto us. For peradventure,
   some time or other some friend out of his way has come to us too, and
   we have found nothing to set before him; and under the experience of
   this necessity, we have received both for ourselves and him. For it
   cannot be, but that some one of us hath fallen in with a friend who
   asked him something, which he could not answer; and then he has
   discovered that he has it not, when he is pressed to give it. A friend
   has come to thee "out of the way," out, that is, of the life of this
   world, in which all men are passing along as strangers, and no one
   abides here as possessor; but to every man it is said, "Thou hast been
   refreshed, pass on, go on thy way, give place to the next comer."
   [3342] Or perhaps from an evil "way," that is, from an evil life, some
   friend of thine wearied out, and not finding the truth, by the hearing
   and perceiving of which he may be made happy, but exhausted amid all
   the lust and poverty of the world, comes to thee, as to a Christian,
   and says, "Give me an account of this, make me a Christian." And he
   asks what it may be thou didst not know through the simplicity of thy
   faith; and so thou hast not whereby to recruit him in his hunger, and
   reminded thus thou discoverest thine own indigence; and when thou
   wishest to teach thou art forced to learn; and whilst thou dost blush
   before him who asked thee, as not finding in thyself what he was
   seeking for, thou art compelled to seek, that thou mayest be thought
   worthy [3343] to find.

   3. And where shouldest thou seek. Where but in the books of the Lord?
   Peradventure what he has asked is contained in the book, but it is
   obscure. Perhaps the Apostle has declared it in some Epistle: declared
   it in such wise, that thou canst read, but canst not understand it:
   thou art not permitted to pass on. For the interrogator urges thee;
   Paul himself, or Peter, or any of the Prophets thou art not allowed to
   ask. For this family is now at rest with their Lord, and intense is the
   ignorance of this life, that is, it is midnight, and thy hungry friend
   is urgent upon thee. A simple faith haply sufficed thee, him it
   suffices not. Is he then to be abandoned? Is he to be cast out of thy
   house? Therefore unto the Lord Himself, unto Him with whom the family
   is at rest, knock by prayer, ask, be instant. He will not, as that
   friend in the parable, arise and give thee as overcome by importunity.
   He wisheth to give; thou for thy knocking hast not yet received; knock
   on; He wisheth to give. And what He wisheth to give, He deferreth, that
   thou mayest long the more for it when deferred, lest if given quickly
   it should be lightly esteemed.

   4. But when thou hast gotten the three loaves, that is, to feed on and
   understand the Trinity, thou hast that whereby thou mayest both live
   thyself, and feed others. Now thou needest not fear the stranger who
   comes out of his way to thee, but by taking him in mayest make him a
   citizen of the household: nor needest thou fear lest thou come to the
   end of it. That Bread will not come to an end, but it will put an end
   to thine indigence. It is Bread, God the Father, and it is Bread, God
   the Son, and it is Bread, God the Holy Ghost. The Father Eternal, the
   Son Coeternal with Him, and the Holy Ghost Coeternal. The Father
   Unchangeable, the Son Unchangeable, the Holy Ghost Unchangeable. The
   Father Creator, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The Father the
   Shepherd and the Giver of life, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The
   Father the Food and Bread eternal, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
   Learn, and teach; live thyself, and feed others. God who giveth to
   thee, giveth thee nothing better than Himself. O thou greedy one, what
   else wast thou seeking for? Or if thou seek for aught else, what will
   suffice thee whom God doth suffice not?

   5. But necessary it is that thou have charity, that thou have faith,
   that thou have hope; that that which is given may be sweet unto thee.
   And these same, faith, hope, charity, are three. And these too are
   gifts of God. For faith we have received from Him; "As God," saith he,
   "hath distributed to every one the measure of faith." [3344] And hope
   we have received from Him, to whom it is said, "Wherein Thou hast
   caused me to hope." [3345] And charity we have received from Him, of
   whom it is said, "The charity of God is shed abroad in our hearts by
   the Holy Ghost, which hath been given to us." [3346] Now these three
   are likewise in some measure different; but all gifts of God. For
   "there abide these three, faith, hope, charity; but the greatest of
   these is charity." [3347] In those loaves it is not said that any one
   loaf was greater than the others; but simply that three loaves were
   asked for, and were given.

   6. See other three things: "Who is there of you, whom if his son ask a
   loaf, will he give him a stone? Or who is there of you of whom if his
   son ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? or if he ask an egg, will
   he offer him a scorpion? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good
   gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in
   heaven give good things to them that ask him!" [3348] Let us then again
   consider these three things, if haply there be not here those three,
   "faith, hope, charity; but the greatest of these is charity." Set down
   then these three things, a loaf, a fish, an egg; the greatest of these
   is a loaf. Therefore in these three things do we well understand
   charity by "the loaf." On which account He has opposed a stone to a
   loaf; because hardness is contrary to charity. By "a fish" we
   understand faith. A certain holy man has said, and we are glad to say
   it too; "The good fish' is a godly faith." It lives amidst the waves,
   and is not broken or dissolved by the waves. Amidst the temptations and
   tempests of this world, liveth godly faith; the world rages, yet it is
   uninjured. Observe only that serpent is contrary to faith. For My faith
   is she betrothed to whom it is said in the Song of Songs, "Come from
   Lebanon, My spouse, coming and passing over to Me from the beginning of
   faith." [3349] Therefore betrothed too, because faith is the beginning
   of betrothal. For something is promised by the bridegroom, and by this
   plighted faith is he held bound. Now to the fish the Lord opposed the
   serpent, to faith the devil. Wherefore to this betrothed one does the
   Apostle say, "I have betrothed you to One Husband, to present you a
   chaste virgin to Christ." And, "I fear lest as the serpent beguiled Eve
   through his subtilty, so your minds also should be corrupted from the
   purity which is in Christ;" [3350] that is, which is in the faith of
   Christ. For he says, "That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith."
   [3351] Therefore let not the devil corrupt our faith, let him not
   devour the fish.

   7. There remains hope, which, as I think, is compared to an egg. For
   hope has not yet arrived at attainment; and an egg is something, but
   not yet the chicken. So then quadrupeds give birth to young ones, but
   birds to the hope of young. Hope therefore exhorts us to this, to
   despise things present, to wait for things to come; "forgetting those
   things which are behind," let us, with the Apostle," reach forth unto
   those things which are before." [3352] For so he says; "But one thing I
   do, forgetting those things which are behind, reaching forth unto those
   things which are before, I follow on earnestly unto the prize of the
   high calling of God in Christ Jesus." Nothing then is so hostile to
   hope, as to "look back," to place hope, that is, in those things which
   flit by and pass away; but in those things should we place it, which
   are not yet given, but which sometime will be given, and will never
   pass away. But when the world is deluged by trials, [3353] as it were
   the sulphureous rain of Sodom, the example of Lot's wife must be
   feared. For she "looked behind;" [3354] and in the spot where she
   looked behind, there did she remain. She was turned into salt, that she
   might season the wise by her example. Of this hope the Apostle Paul
   speaketh thus; "For we are saved in hope; but hope that is seen is not
   hope; for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for: but if we hope
   for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. For what a
   man seeth, why doth he yet hope for." [3355] It is an egg, and not as
   yet the chicken. And it is covered with a shell; it is not seen because
   it is covered; let it be with patience waited for; let it feel the
   warmth, that it may come to life. Press on, "reach forth unto the
   things which are before, forget the past. For the things which are
   seen, are temporal. Not looking back," says he, "at the things which
   are seen, but at the things which are not seen. For the things which
   are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal."
   [3356] Unto those things which are not seen then extend thy hope, wait,
   endure. Look not back. Fear "the scorpion" for thine "egg." See how he
   wounds with the tail, which he has behind him. Let not then the
   "scorpion" crush thine "egg," let not this world crush thy hope (so to
   say) with its poison, therefore against thee, because behind. How
   loudly does the world talk to thee, what an uproar does it make behind
   thy back, that thou mayest look back! that is, that thou mayest place
   thy hope in present things (and yet not even present, for they cannot
   be called present which have no fixedness), and mayest turn thy mind
   away from that which Christ hath promised, and not yet given, but who,
   seeing He is faithful, will give it, and mayest be content to look for
   rest in a perishing world.

   8. For this cause does God mingle bitternesses with the felicities of
   earth, that another felicity may be sought, in whose sweetness there is
   no deceit; yet by these very bitternesses does the world endeavour to
   turn thee away from thy longing pursuit after the things "which are
   before," and to turn thee back. For these bitternesses, for these
   tribulations dost thou murmur and say, "See, all things are perishing
   in Christian times." What complaint is this! God hath not promised me
   that these things shall not perish; Christ hath not promised me this.
   The Eternal hath promised things eternal: if I believe, from a mortal,
   I shall be made eternal. What noise is this, O world [3357] impure!
   what murmuring is this! Why art thou trying to turn me back? Perishing
   as thou art, thou wishest to detain me; what wouldest thou do, if thou
   hadst any permanence? Whom wouldest thou not beguile by thy sweetness,
   if with all thy bitternesses thou dost impose thy false nourishment
   [3358] upon us? For me, if I have hope, if I hold fast my hope, my
   "egg" has not been wounded by the "scorpion." "I will bless the Lord at
   all times, His praise shall be ever in my mouth." [3359] Be the world
   prosperous, or be the world turned upside down; "I will bless the
   Lord," who made the world. Yes, verily, I will bless Him. Be it well
   with me according to the flesh, or be it ill according to the flesh, "I
   will bless the Lord at all times, His praise shall be ever in my
   mouth." For if I bless when it is well, and blaspheme when it is ill
   with me; I have received the "scorpion's" sting, being pricked "I have
   looked back;" which be far from us. "The Lord gave, the Lord hath taken
   away: it is done, as the Lord pleased; blessed be the name of the
   Lord." [3360]

   9. The city which has given us birth according to the flesh still
   abideth, God be thanked. O that it may receive a spiritual birth, and
   together with us pass over unto eternity! If the city which has given
   us birth according to the flesh abide not, yet that which has given us
   birth according to the Spirit abides for ever. "The Lord doth build up
   Jerusalem." [3361] Has He by sleeping brought His building to ruin, or
   by not keeping it, let the enemy into it? "Except the Lord keep the
   city, he that keepeth it waketh but in vain." [3362] And what "city"?
   "He that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep." [3363] What
   is Israel, but the seed of Abraham? What the seed of Abraham, but
   Christ? "And to thy seed," he says, "which is Christ." [3364] And to us
   what says he? "But ye are Christ's, therefore Abraham's seed, heirs
   according to the promise." [3365] "In thy seed," saith He, "shall all
   nations be blessed." [3366] The holy city, the faithful city, the city
   on earth a sojourner, hath its foundation in heaven. O faithful one, do
   not corrupt thy hope, do not lose thy charity, "gird up thy loins,"
   light, and hold out thy lamps before thee; "wait for the Lord, when He
   will return from the wedding." [3367] Why art thou alarmed, because the
   kingdoms of the earth are perishing? Therefore hath a heavenly kingdom
   been promised thee, that thou mightest not perish with the kingdoms of
   the earth. For it was foretold, foretold distinctly, that they should
   perish. For we cannot deny that it was foretold. Thy Lord for whom thou
   art waiting, hath told thee, "Nation shall rise up against nation, and
   kingdom against kingdom." [3368] The kingdoms of the earth have their
   changes; He will come of whom it is said, "and of His kingdom there
   shall be no end." [3369]

   10. They who have promised this to earthly kingdoms have not been
   guided by truth, but have lied through flattery. A certain poet of
   theirs has introduced Jupiter speaking, and he says of the Romans;

   To them no bounds of empire I assign,

   Nor term of years to their immortal line. [3370]

   Most certainly truth makes no such answer. This empire which thou hast
   given "without term of years," is it on earth, or in heaven? On earth
   assuredly. And even if it were in heaven, yet "heaven and earth shall
   pass away." [3371] Those things shall pass away which God hath Himself
   made; how much more rapidly shall that pass away which Romulus founded!
   Perhaps if we had a mind to press Virgil on this point, and tauntingly
   to ask him why he said it; he would take us aside privately, and say to
   us, "I know this as well as you, but what could I do who was selling
   words to the Romans, if by this kind of flattery I did not promise
   something which was false? And yet even in this very instance I have
   been cautious, when I said, I assigned to them an empire without term
   of years,' I introduced their Jupiter to say it. I did not utter this
   falsehood in my own person, but put upon Jupiter the character of
   untruthfulness: as the god was false, the poet was false. For would ye
   know that I well knew the truth of it? In another place, when I did not
   introduce this stone, called Jupiter, but spoke in my own person, I
   said,

   Th' impending ruin of the Roman state.' [3372]

   See how I spoke of the impending ruin of the state. I spoke of its
   impending ruin. I did not suppress it." When he spoke in truth he was
   not silent as to its ruin; when in flattery, he promised that it should
   abide for ever.

   11. Let us not then faint, my Brethren: an end there will be to all
   earthly kingdoms. If that end be now, God knoweth. For peradventure it
   is not yet, and we, through some infirmity, or mercifulness, or misery,
   are wishing that it may not be yet; nevertheless will it not therefore
   some day be? Fix your hope in God, desire the things eternal, wait for
   the things eternal. Ye are Christians, Brethren, we are all Christians.
   Christ did not come down into the flesh that [3373] we might live
   softly; let us endure rather than love the things present; manifest is
   the harm of adversity, deceitful is the soft blandishment of
   prosperity. Fear the sea, even when it is a calm. On no account let us
   hear in vain, "Let us lift up our hearts." Why place we our hearts in
   the earth, when we see that the earth is being turned upside down? We
   cannot but exhort you, that ye may have something to say and answer in
   defence of your hope against the deriders and blasphemers of the
   Christian name. Let no one by his murmuring turn you back from waiting
   for the things to come. All who by reason of these adversities
   blaspheme our Christ, are the "scorpion's" tail. Let us put our egg
   under the wings of that Hen of the Gospel, which crieth out to that
   false and abandoned city, "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I
   have gathered thy children together, even as a hen her chickens, and
   thou wouldest not!" [3374] Let it not be said to us, "How often would
   I, and thou wouldest not!" For that hen is the Divine Wisdom; but
   assumed flesh to accommodate Itself to its chickens. See the hen with
   feathers bristling, with wings hanging down, with voice broken, and
   tremulous, and faint, and languid, accommodating herself to her little
   ones. Our egg then, that is, our hope, let us place beneath the wings
   of this Hen.

   12. Ye have noticed, it may be, how a hen will tear a scorpion in
   pieces. O then that the Hen of the Gospel would tear in pieces and
   devour these blasphemers, creeping out of their holes, and inflicting
   hurtful stings, would pass them over into Her Body, and turn them into
   an egg. Let them not be angry; we seem to be excited; but we do not
   return curses for curses. "We are cursed, and we bless, being defamed,
   we entreat." [3375] But "let him not speak of Rome, it is said of me: O
   that he would hold his tongue about Rome;" as though I were insulting
   it, and not rather entreating the Lord for it, and exhorting you all,
   unworthy as I am. Be it far from me to insult it! The Lord avert this
   from my heart, and from the grief of my conscience. Have we not had
   many brethren there? have we not still? Does not a large portion of the
   pilgrim city Jerusalem live there? has it not endured there temporal
   afflictions? but it has not lost the things eternal. What can I say
   then, when I speak of Rome, but that is false, which they say of our
   Christ, that He is Rome's destroyer, and that the gods of wood and
   stone were her defenders? Add what is more costly, "gods of brass." Add
   what is costlier still, "of silver and gold:" the "idols of the nations
   are silver and gold." [3376] He did not say, "stone;" he did not say,
   "wood;" he did not say, "clay;" but, what they value highly, "silver
   and gold." Yet these silver and golden idols "have eyes, and see not."
   [3377] The gods of gold, of wood, are as regards their costliness
   unequal; but as to "having eyes, and seeing not," they are equal. See
   to what sort of guardians learned men have entrusted Rome, to those
   "who have eyes, and see not." Or if they were able to preserve Rome,
   why did they first perish themselves? They say; "Rome perished at the
   same time." Nevertheless they perished. "No," they say, "they did not
   perish themselves, but their statues." Well, how then could they keep
   your houses, who were not able to keep their own statues? Alexandria
   once lost such gods as these. Constantinople some time since, ever
   since it was made a grand city, for it was made so by a Christian
   Emperor, lost its false gods; and yet it has increased, and still
   increases, and remains. And remain it will, as long as God pleases. For
   we do not to this city either promise an eternal duration because we
   say this. Carthage remains now in its possession of the Name of Christ,
   yet once on a time its goddess Cælestis [3378] was overthrown; because
   celestial she was not, but terrestrial.

   13. And that which they say is not true, that immediately on losing her
   gods Rome has been taken [3379] and ruined. It is not true at all;
   their images were overthrown before; and even so were the Goths with
   Rhadagaisus [3380] conquered. Remember, my Brethren, remember; it is no
   long time since, but a few years, call it to mind. When all the images
   in the city of Rome had been overthrown, Rhadagaisus king of the Goths
   came with a large army, much more numerous than that of Alaric was.
   Rhadagaisus was a Pagan; he sacrificed to Jupiter every day. Everywhere
   it was announced, that Rhadagaisus did not cease from sacrificing. Then
   said they all, "Lo, we do not sacrifice, he does sacrifice, we, who are
   not allowed to sacrifice must be conquered by him who does sacrifice."
   But God making proof that not even temporal deliverance, nor the
   preservation of these earthly kingdoms, consist in these sacrifices,
   Rhadagaisus, by the Lord's help, was marvellously overcome. Afterwards
   came other Goths who did not sacrifice, they came, who though they were
   not Catholics in the Christian faith, were yet hostile and opposed to
   idols, and they took Rome; they conquered those who put their trust in
   idols, who were still seeking after the idols they had lost, and
   desiring still to sacrifice to the lost gods. And amongst them too were
   some of our brethren, and these were afflicted also: but they had
   learnt to say, "I will bless the Lord at all times." [3381] They were
   involved in the afflictions of their earthly kingdom: but they lost not
   the kingdom of heaven; yea, rather, they were made the better for
   obtaining it through the exercise of tribulations. And if they did not
   in their tribulations blaspheme, they came out as sound vessels from
   the furnace, and were filled with the blessing of the Lord. Whereas
   those blasphemers, who follow and long after earthly things, who place
   their hope in earthly things, when these they have lost, whether they
   will or no, what shall they retain? where shall they abide? Nothing
   without, nothing within; an empty coffer, an emptier conscience. Where
   is their rest? where their salvation? where their hope? Let them then
   come, let them give over blaspheming, let them learn to adore; let the
   scorpions with their stings be devoured by the Hen, let them be turned
   into His body who makes them pass over into it; let them on earth be
   exercised, in heaven be crowned.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3340] Luke xi. 5.

   [3341] Luke xviii. 2.

   [3342] Ecclus. xxix. 27.

   [3343] Merearis.

   [3344] Rom. xii. 3.

   [3345] Ps. cxix. 49.

   [3346] Rom. v. 5.

   [3347] 1 Cor. xiii. 13.

   [3348] Luke xi. 11-13.

   [3349] Cant. iv. 8, Sept. See on St. Cyprian, Ep. p. 278, note n.

   [3350] 2 Cor. xi. 2, 3.

   [3351] Eph. iii. 17.

   [3352] Phil. iii. 13.

   [3353] As by the irruption of the barbarian tribes.

   [3354] Gen. xix. 26.

   [3355] Rom. viii. 24, 25.

   [3356] 2 Cor. iv. 18.

   [3357] Munde immunde.

   [3358] Alimenta mentiris.

   [3359] Ps. xxxiv. 1.

   [3360] Job i. 21, Sept.

   [3361] Ps. cxlvii. 2.

   [3362] Ps. cxxvii. 1.

   [3363] Ps. cxxi. 4.

   [3364] Gal. iii. 16.

   [3365] Gal. iii. 29.

   [3366] Gen. xii. 3 and xxii. 18.

   [3367] Luke xii. 35, 36.

   [3368] Mark xiii. 8.

   [3369] Luke i. 33.

   [3370] Virg. Æneid, i. 282-283 (Dryden).

   [3371] Luke xxi. 33.

   [3372] Georg. ii. 489.

   [3373] Ad delicias.

   [3374] Matt. xxiii. 37.

   [3375] 1 Cor. iv. 12, 13.

   [3376] Ps. cxv. 4.

   [3377] Ps. cxv. 5.

   [3378] Tutelary goddess of Carthage. De Civit. Dei, ii. 4 and 26; Ps.
   62, § 7, 98, § 14. Tert. Apol. i. 12, 24.

   [3379] By Alaric, Gibbon, vol. 4, 109, etc.

   [3380] King of the Goths, who invaded Italy, A.D. 406, four years
   before the taking of Rome by Alaric, 410, Gibbon, Rom. Emp. vol. 4,
   31-38.

   [3381] Ps. xxxiv. 1.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LVI.

   [CVI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xi. 39, "Now do ye Pharisees cleanse
   the outside of the cup and the platter," etc.

   1. Ye have heard the holy Gospel, how the Lord Jesus in that which He
   said to the Pharisees, conveyed doubtless a lesson to His own
   disciples, that they should not think that righteousness consists in
   the cleansing of the body. For every day did the Pharisees wash
   themselves in water before they dined; as if a daily washing could be a
   cleansing of the heart. Then He showed what sort of persons they were.
   He told them who saw them; for He saw not their faces only but their
   inward parts. For that ye may know this, that Pharisee, to whom Christ
   made answer, thought within himself, he uttered nothing aloud, yet the
   Lord heard him. For within himself he blamed the Lord Christ, because
   He had so come to his feast without having washed. He was thinking, the
   Lord heard, therefore He answered. What then did He answer? "Now do ye
   Pharisees wash the outside of the platter; but within ye are full of
   guile and ravening." [3382] What! is this to come to a feast! how did
   He not spare the man by whom He had been invited? Yea rather by
   rebuking He did spare him, that being reformed He might spare him in
   the judgment. And what is it that He showeth to us? That Baptism also
   which is conferred once for all, cleanses by faith. Now faith is
   within, not without. Wherefore it is said and read in the Acts of the
   Apostles, "Cleansing their hearts by faith." [3383] And the Apostle
   Peter thus speaks in his Epistle; "So too hath He given you a
   similitude from Noah's ark, how that eight souls were saved by water."
   And then he added, "So also in a like figure will baptism save us, not
   the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
   conscience." [3384] "This answer of a good conscience" did the
   Pharisees despise, and washed "that which was without;" within they
   continued full of pollution.

   2. And what did He say to them after this? "But rather give alms, and
   behold all things are clean unto you." [3385] See the praise of alms,
   do, and prove it. But mark awhile; this was said to the Pharisees.
   These Pharisees were Jews, the choice men as it were of the Jews. For
   those of most consideration and learning were then called Pharisees.
   They had not been washed by Christ's Baptism; they had not yet believed
   on Christ, the Only-begotten Son of God, who walked among them, yet was
   not acknowledged by them. How then doth He say to them, "Give alms, and
   behold all things are clean unto you"? If the Pharisees had paid heed
   to Him, and given alms, at once according to His word "all things would
   have been clean to them;" what need then was there for them to believe
   on Him? But if they could not be cleansed, except by believing on Him,
   who "cleanseth the heart by faith;" what means, "Give alms, and behold
   all things are clean unto you"? Let us carefully consider this, and
   peradventure He Himself explains it.

   3. When He had spoken thus, doubtless they thought that they did give
   alms. And how did they give them? They tithed all they had, they took
   away a tenth of all their produce, and gave it. It is no easy matter to
   find a Christian who doth as much. See what the Jews did. Not wheat
   only, but wine, and oil; nor this only, but even the most trifling
   things, cummin, rue, mint, and anise, [3386] in obedience to God's
   precept, they tithed all; put aside, that is, a tenth part, and gave
   alms of it. I suppose then that they recalled this to mind, and thought
   that the Lord Christ was speaking to no purpose, as if to those who did
   not give alms; whereas they knew their own doings, how that they
   tithed, and gave alms of the minutest and most trifling of their
   produce. They mocked Him within themselves as He spake thus, as if to
   men who did not give alms. The Lord knowing this, immediately
   subjoined, "But woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, who tithe mint,
   and cummin, and rue, and all herbs." [3387] That ye may know, I am
   aware of your alms. Doubtless these tithes are your alms; yea even the
   minutest and most trifling of your fruits do ye tithe; "Yet ye leave
   the weightier matters of the law, judgment and charity." Mark. Ye have
   "left judgment and charity," and ye tithe herbs. This is not to do
   alms. "These," saith He, "ought ye to do, and not to leave the other
   undone." Do what? "Judgment and charity, justice and mercy;" and "not
   to leave the other undone." Do these; but give the preference to the
   others.

   4. If this be so, why did He say to them, "Do alms, and behold all
   things are clean unto you"? What is, "Do alms"? Do mercy. What is, "Do
   mercy"? If thou understand, begin with thine own self. For how
   shouldest thou be merciful to another, if thou art cruel to thyself?
   "Give alms, and all things are clean unto you." Do true alms. What is
   alms? Mercy. Hear the Scripture; "Have mercy on thine own soul,
   pleasing God." [3388] Do alms, "Have mercy on thine own soul, pleasing
   God." Thine own soul is a beggar before thee, return to thy conscience.
   Whosoever thou art, who art living in wickedness or unbelief, return to
   thy conscience; and there thou findest thy soul in beggary, thou
   findest it needy, thou findest it poor, thou findest it in sorrow, nay
   perhaps thou dost not find it in need, but dumb through its neediness.
   For if it beg, it "hungereth after righteousness." Now when thou
   findest thy soul in such a state (all this is within, in thy heart),
   first do alms, give it bread. What bread? If the Pharisee had asked
   this question, the Lord would have said to him, "Give alms to thine own
   soul." For this He did say to him; but he did not understand it, when
   He enumerated to them the alms which they were used to do, and which
   they thought were unknown to Christ; and He saith to them, "I know that
   ye do this, ye tithe mint and anise, cummin and rue;' but I am speaking
   of other alms; ye despise judgment and charity.' In judgment and
   charity give alms to thine own soul." What is "in judgment"? Look back,
   and discover thyself; mislike thyself, pronounce a judgment against
   thyself. And what is charity? "Love the Lord God with all thy heart,
   and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; love thy neighbour as
   thyself:" [3389] and thou hast done alms first to thine own soul,
   within thy conscience. Whereas if thou neglect this alms, give what
   thou wilt, give how much thou wilt; reserve of thy goods not a tenth,
   but a half; give nine parts, and leave but one for thine own self: thou
   doest nothing, when thou doest not alms to thine own soul, and art poor
   in thyself. Let thy soul have its food, that it perish not by famine.
   Give her bread. What bread, thou wilt say? He speaketh with thee
   Himself. If thou wouldest hear, and understand, and believe the Lord,
   He would say to thee Himself, "I am the Living Bread which came down
   from heaven. [3390] Wouldest thou not first give this Bread to thine
   own soul, and do alms unto it? If then thou believest, thou oughtest so
   to do, that thou mayest first feed thine own soul. Believe in Christ,
   and the things which are within shall be cleansed; and what is without
   shall be clean also. "Let us turn to the Lord," etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3382] Luke xi. 39.

   [3383] Acts xv. 9.

   [3384] 1 Pet. iii. 20, 21.

   [3385] Luke xi. 41.

   [3386] Matt. xxiii. 23.

   [3387] Luke xi. 42.

   [3388] Ecclus. xxx. 23, Vulgate.

   [3389] Matt. xxii. 37, etc.

   [3390] John vi. 41.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LVII.

   [CVII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xii. 15, "And he said unto them, take
   heed, and keep yourselves from all covetousness." [3391]

   1. I doubt not but that ye who fear God, do hear His word with awe, and
   execute it with cheerfulness; that what He hath promised, ye may at
   present hope for, hereafter receive. We have just now heard the Lord
   Christ Jesus, the Son of God, giving us a precept. The Truth, who
   neither deceiveth, nor is deceived, hath given us a precept; let us
   hear, fear, beware. What is this precept then: "I say unto you, Beware
   of all covetousness"? [3392] What is, "of all covetousness"? What is,
   "of all"? Why did He add, "of all"? For He might have spoken thus,
   "Beware of covetousness." It suited Him to add, "of all;" and to say,
   "Beware of all covetousness."

   2. Why He said this, the occasion as it were out of which these words
   arose, is shown to us in the holy Gospel. A certain man appealed to Him
   against his brother, who had taken away all his patrimony, and gave not
   back his proper portion to his brother. Ye see then how good a case
   this appellant had. For he was not seeking to take by violence
   another's, but was seeking only for his own which had been left him by
   his parents; these was he demanding back by his appeal to the judgment
   of the Lord. He had an unrighteous brother; but against an unrighteous
   brother had he found a righteous Judge. Ought he then in so good a
   cause to lose that opportunity? Or who would say to his brother,
   "Restore to thy brother his portion," if Christ would not say it? Would
   that judge be likely to say it, whom perhaps his richer and
   extortionate brother might corrupt by a bribe? Forlorn then as he was,
   and despoiled of his father's goods, when he had found such and so
   great a Judge he goes up to Him, he appeals to, he beseeches Him, he
   lays his cause before Him in few words. For what occasion was there to
   set forth his cause at length, when he was speaking to Him who could
   even see the heart? "Master," he says, "speak to my brother, that he
   divide the inheritance with me." [3393] The Lord did not say to him,
   "Let thy brother come." No, He neither sent for him to be present, nor
   in his presence did He say to him who had appealed to Him, "Prove what
   thou wast saying." He asked for half an inheritance, he asked for half
   an inheritance on earth; the Lord offered him a whole inheritance in
   heaven. The Lord gave more than asked for.

   3. "Speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me." Just
   case, short case. But let us hear Him who at once gives judgment and
   instruction. "Man," He saith. "O man;" for seeing thou valuest this
   inheritance so highly, what art thou but a man? He wished to make him
   something more than man. What more did He wish to make him, from whom
   He wished to take covetousness away? What more did He wish to make him?
   I will tell you, "I have said, Ye are gods, and all of you are children
   of the Most High." [3394] Lo, what He wished to make him, to reckon him
   that hath no covetousness among the "gods." "Man, who made Me a divider
   among you?" [3395] So the Apostle Paul His servant, when he said, "I
   beseech you, brethren, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there
   be no schisms among you," [3396] was unwilling to be a divider. And
   afterwards he thus admonished them who were running after his name, and
   dividing Christ: "Every one of you saith, I am of Paul, and I of
   Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Is Christ divided? Was Paul
   crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?" [3397]
   Judge then, how wicked are those men, who would have Him to be divided,
   who would not be a divider. "Who," saith He, "hath made Me a divider
   among you?"

   4. Thou hast petitioned for a kindness; hear counsel. "I say unto you,
   Beware of all covetousness." [3398] "Perhaps," he would say, "thou
   wouldest call him covetous and greedy, if he were seeking another's
   goods; but I say, seek not even thine own greedily or covetously." This
   is "Of all, beware of all covetousness." A heavy burden this! If by any
   chance this burden be imposed on them that are weak; let Him be sought
   unto, that He who imposes it, may vouchsafe to give us strength. For it
   is not a thing to be lightly regarded, my Brethren, when our Lord, our
   Redeemer, our Saviour, who died for us, who gave His Own Blood as our
   ransom, to redeem us, our Advocate and Judge; it is no light matter
   when He saith, "Beware." He knoweth well how great the evil is; we know
   it not, let us believe Him. "Beware," saith He. Wherefore? of what? "of
   all covetousness." I am but keeping what is mine own, I am not taking
   away another's; "Beware of all covetousness." Not only is he covetous,
   who plunders the goods of others; but he is covetous too, who greedily
   keeps his own. But if he is so blamed who greedily keeps his own; how
   is he condemned who plunders what is another's! "Beware," He saith, "of
   all covetousness: For a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of
   the things which he possesseth." He that stores up great abundance, how
   much does he take therefrom to live? When he has taken it, and in a way
   separated in thought sufficient to live upon from it, let him consider
   for whom the rest remains; lest haply when thou keepest wherewith to
   live, thou art gathering only wherewith to die. Behold Christ, behold
   truth, behold severity. "Beware," saith truth: "Beware," saith
   severity. If thou love not the truth, fear severity. "A man's life
   consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth."
   Believe Him, He doth not deceive thee. On the other hand, thou sayest,
   "Yea, a man's life' does consist in the abundance of the things which
   he possesses.'" He doth not deceive thee; thou deceivest thyself.

   5. Out of this occasion then, when that appellant was seeking his own
   portion, not desiring to plunder another's, arose that sentence of the
   Lord, wherein He said not, "Beware of covetousness;" but added, "of all
   covetousness." Nor was this all: He giveth another example of a certain
   rich man, "whose ground had turned out well." [3399] "There was," He
   saith, "a certain rich man, whose ground had turned [3400] out well."
   What is, "had turned out well"? The ground which he possessed had
   brought forth a great produce. How great? So that he could not find
   where to bestow it: suddenly, through his abundance he became
   straitened--this old covetous man. For how many years had already
   passed away, and yet those barns had been enough? So great then was the
   produce, that the accustomed places were not sufficient. And the
   wretched man sought counsel, not as to how he should lay the additional
   produce out, but how he should store it up; and in thinking he
   discovered an expedient. He seemed as it were wise in his own eyes, by
   the discovery of this expedient. Knowingly did he think of it, wisely
   hit upon it. What was this he wisely hit upon? "I will destroy," he
   says, "my" old "barns, and will build new ones greater, and will fill
   them; and I will say to my soul." What wilt thou say to thy soul?
   "Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease,
   eat, drink, be merry." [3401] This did the wise discoverer of this
   expedient say to his soul.

   6. "And God," who doth not disdain to speak even with fools, "said unto
   him." [3402] Some of you may peradventure say, And how did God speak
   with a fool? O, my Brethren, with how many fools does He speak here,
   when the Gospel is read! When it is read, are not they who hear and do
   not, fools? What then did the Lord say? For he, I repeat, thought
   himself wise by the discovery of his expedient. "Thou fool," He saith;
   "Thou fool," who seemest wise unto thyself; "Thou fool," who hast said
   to thy soul, "Thou hast much goods laid up for many years: to-day is
   thy soul required of thee!" Thy soul to which thou hast said, "Thou
   hast much goods," to-day is "required," and hath no good at all. Let it
   then despise these goods, and be herself good, that when she is
   "required," she may depart in assured hope. For what is more perverse
   [3403] than a man [3404] who wishes to have "much goods," and does not
   wish to be good himself? Unworthy art thou to have them, who dost not
   wish to be what thou dost wish to have. For dost thou wish to have a
   bad country house? No indeed, but a good one. Or a bad wife? No, but a
   good one. Or a bad hood? [3405] Or even a bad shoe? And why a bad soul
   only? He did not in this place say to this fool who was thinking on
   vain things, building barns, and who had no regard to the wants [3406]
   of the poor; He did not say to him, "To-day shall thy soul be hurried
   away to hell:" He said no such thing as this, but "is required of
   thee." "I do not tell thee whither thy soul shall go; yet hence, where
   thou art laying up for it such store of things, must it depart, whether
   thou wilt or no." Lo, "thou fool," thou hast thought to fill thy new
   and greater barns, as if there was nothing to be done with what thou
   hast.

   7. But peradventure he was not yet a Christian. Let us hear then,
   Brethren, to whom as believers the Gospel is read, by whom He who spake
   these things, is worshipped, whose mark is borne by us on our forehead,
   and is held in the heart. For of very great concernment is it where a
   man hath the mark of Christ, whether in the forehead, or both in the
   forehead and the heart. Ye have heard to-day the words of the holy
   prophet Ezekiel, how that before God sent one to destroy the ungodly
   people, He first sent one to mark them, and said to him, "Go and set a
   mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and moan for the sins of
   my people that are done in the midst of them." [3407] He did not say,
   "which [3408] are done without them;" but "in the midst of them." Yet
   they "sigh and moan;" and therefore are they "marked on the forehead:"
   in the forehead of the inner man, not the outer. For there is a
   forehead in the face, there is a forehead in the conscience. So it
   happens that when the inner forehead is stricken, the outer grows red;
   either red with shame, or pale with fear. So then there is a forehead
   of the inner man. There were they "marked" that they might not be
   destroyed; because though they did not correct the sins which were
   "done in the midst of them," yet they sorrowed for them, and by that
   very sorrow separated themselves; and though separated in God's sight,
   they were mixed with them in the eyes of men. They are "marked"
   secretly, are not hurt openly. Afterwards the Destroyer is sent, and to
   him it is said, "Go, lay waste, spare neither young nor old, male nor
   female, but come not near those who have the mark on their forehead."
   [3409] How great security is granted to you, my Brethren, who among
   this people are sighing, and moaning for the iniquities which are being
   done in the midst of you, and who do them not!

   8. But that ye may not commit iniquities, "beware of all covetousness."
   I will tell you in its full extent, what is "of all covetousness." In
   matter of lust he is covetous, whom his own wife suffices not. And
   idolatry itself is called covetousness; because again in matter of
   divine worship [3410] he is covetous, whom the one and true God
   suffices not. What but the covetous soul makes for itself many gods?
   What but the covetous soul makes to itself false [3411] martyrs?
   "Beware of all covetousness." Lo, thou lovest thine own goods, and dost
   boast thyself in that thou seekest not the goods of others; see what
   evil thou doest in not hearing Christ, who saith, "Beware of all
   covetousness." See thou dost love thine own goods, thou dost not take
   away the goods of others; thou hast the fruits of thy labour, they are
   justly thine; thou hast been left an heir, some one whose good graces
   thou hast attained has given it to thee; thou hast been on the sea, and
   in its perils, hast committed no fraud, hast sworn no lie, hast
   acquired what it hath pleased God thou shouldest; and thou art keeping
   it greedily as in a good conscience, because thou dost not possess it
   from evil sources, and dost not seek what is another's. Yet if thou
   give not heed to Him who hath said, "Beware of all covetousness," hear
   how great evils thou wilt be ready to do for thine own goods' sake. Lo,
   for example, it hath chanced to thee to be made a judge. Thou wilt not
   be corrupted, because thou dost not seek the goods of others; no one
   giveth thee a bribe and says, "Give judgment against my adversary."
   This be far from thee, a man, who seekest not the things of others, how
   couldest thou be persuaded to do this? Yet see what evil thou wilt be
   ready to do for thine own goods' sake. Peradventure he that wishes thee
   to judge evilly, and pronounce sentence for him against his adversary
   is a powerful man, and able to bring up false accusation against thee,
   that thou mayest lose what thou hast. Thou dost reflect, and think upon
   his power, think of thine own goods thou art keeping, which thou dost
   love: not which thou hast possessed, but in whose power [3412] rather
   thou art thyself unhappily fixed. This thy bird-lime, by reason of
   which thou hast not the wings of virtue free, thou dost look to; and
   thou sayest within thine own self, "I am offending this man, he has
   much influence in the world; he will suggest evil accusations against
   me, and I shall be outlawed, [3413] and lose all I have." Thus thou
   wilt give unrighteous judgment, not when thou seekest another's, but
   when thou keepest thine own.

   9. Give me a man who has given ear to Christ, give me a man who has
   heard with fear "Beware of all covetousness;" and let him not say to
   me, "I am a poor man, a plebeian of mean estate, one of the common
   people, how can I hope ever to be a judge? I am in no fear of this
   temptation, the peril of which thou hast placed before mine eyes." Yet
   lo, even this poor man I will tell what he ought to fear. Some rich and
   powerful person calls thee to give false witness for him. What wilt
   thou be doing now? Tell me. Thou hast a good little property of thine
   own; thou hast laboured for it, hast acquired, and kept it. That person
   requires of thee; "Give false witness for me, and I will give thee so
   and so much." Thou who seekest not the things of others, sayest, "That
   be far from me: I do not seek for what it has not pleased God to give
   me, I will not receive it; depart from me." "Hast thou no wish to
   receive what I give? I will take away what thou hast already." See now
   prove thyself, question now thine own self. Why dost thou look at me?
   Look inward on thine own self, look at thine own self within, examine
   thine own self within; sit down before thine own self, and summon thine
   own self before thee, and stretch thyself upon the rack of God's
   commandment, and torment thyself with His fear, and deal not softly
   with thyself; answer thine own self. Lo, if any one were to threaten
   thee with this, what wouldest thou do? "I will take away from thee what
   with so great labour thou hast acquired, if thou wilt not give false
   witness for me." Give him that; "Beware of all covetousness." "O my
   servant," He will say to thee, "whom I have redeemed and made free,
   whom from a servant I have adopted to be a brother, whom I have set as
   a member in My Body, give ear to Me: He may take away what thou hast
   acquired, Me he shall not take away from thee. Art thou keeping thine
   own goods, that thou mayest not perish? What, have I not said unto
   thee, Beware of all covetousness'?"

   10. Lo, thou art in confusion, tossed to and fro; thy heart as a ship
   is shaken about by tempests. Christ is asleep: awake Him, that
   sleepeth, and thou shalt be exposed no more to the raging of the storm.
   Awake Him, who was pleased to have nothing here, and thou hast all, who
   came even to the Cross for thee, whose "Bones" as He was naked and
   hanging "were numbered" by them that mocked Him; and "beware of all
   covetousness." Covetousness of money is not all; "beware of
   covetousness" of life. A dreadful covetousness, covetousness much to be
   feared. Sometimes a man will despise what he has, and say, "I will not
   give false witness; I will not. You tell me, I will take away what thou
   hast. Take away what I have; you do not take away what I have within.
   For he was not left a poor man, who said, The Lord gave, the Lord hath
   taken away; it is done as it pleased the Lord; blessed' therefore be
   the Name of the Lord. Naked came I out of my mother's womb, naked shall
   I return to the earth.' [3414] Naked outwardly, well-clothed within.
   Naked as regards these rags, these corruptible rags outwardly, clothed
   within. With what? Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness.'"
   [3415] But what if he say to thee, when thou hast despised the things
   which thou possessest, what if he say to thee, "I will kill thee"? If
   thou have given ear to Christ, answer him, "Wilt Thou kill me? Better
   that thou shouldest kill my body, than that I by a false tongue should
   kill my soul! What canst thou do to me? Thou wilt kill my body; my soul
   will depart at liberty, to receive again at the end of the world even
   this very body she hath despised. What canst thou do to me then?
   Whereas if I should give false witness for thee, with thy tongue do I
   kill myself; and not in my body do I kill myself; For the mouth that
   lieth killeth the soul.'" [3416] But peradventure thou dost not say so.
   And why dost thou not say so? Thou wishest to live; thou wishest to
   live longer than God hath appointed for thee? Dost thou then "beware of
   all covetousness"? So long was it God's will that thou shouldest live,
   till this person came to thee. It may be that he will kill thee, to
   make a martyr of thee. Entertain then no undue desire of life; and so
   thou wilt not have an eternity of death. Ye see how that covetousness
   everywhere, when we wish for more than is necessary, causes us to sin.
   Beware we of all covetousness, if we would enjoy eternal wisdom.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3391] pases, for tes, pleonexias--A. B. D. K. L. M. Q. X., etc.,
   Verss. ap. Scholz. Griesbach regards it as the more probable reading.
   [Tischendorf, Westcott and Hort read pases with ' and B.]

   [3392] Luke xii. 15.

   [3393] Luke xii. 13.

   [3394] Ps. lxxxii. 6.

   [3395] Luke xii. 14.

   [3396] 1 Cor. i. 10.

   [3397] 1 Cor. i. 12, 13.

   [3398] Luke xii. 15.

   [3399] Luke xii. 16.

   [3400] Successerat.

   [3401] Luke xii. 18, 19.

   [3402] Luke xii. 20.

   [3403] Iniquius.

   [3404] Vid. Serm. xxii. (lxxii. Ben.) 4 (iii.); xxxii. (lxxxii. Ben.)
   14 (xi.); xxxv. (lxxxv. Ben).

   [3405] Casulam.

   [3406] Ventres.

   [3407] Ezek ix. 4.

   [3408] Against the Donatists.

   [3409] Ezek. ix. 6.

   [3410] Divinitate.

   [3411] In allusion to the Circumcelliones amongst the Donatists. See
   ab. p. 305, note.

   [3412] Quibus male inhæsisti.

   [3413] Proscribor.

   [3414] Job i. 21.

   [3415] Ps. cxxxii. 9.

   [3416] Wisd. i. 11.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LVIII.

   [CVIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xii. 35, "Let your loins be girded
   about, and your lamps burning; and be ye yourselves like," etc. And on
   the words of the 34th Psalm, v. 12, "what man is he that desireth
   life," etc.

   1. Our Lord Jesus Christ both came to men, and went away from men, and
   is to come to men. And yet He was here when He came, nor did He depart
   when He went away, and He is to come to them to whom He said, "Lo, I am
   with you, even unto the end of the world." [3417] According to the
   "form of a servant" then, which He took for our sakes, was He born at a
   certain time, and was slain, and rose again, and now "dieth no more,
   neither shall death have any more dominion over Him;" [3418] but
   according to His Divinity, wherein He was equal to the Father, was He
   already in this world, and "the world was made by Him, and the world
   knew Him not." [3419] On this point ye have just heard the Gospel, what
   admonition it has given us, putting us on our guard, and wishing us to
   be unencumbered and prepared to await the end; that after these last
   [3420] things, which are to be feared in this world, that rest may
   succeed which hath no end. Blessed are they who shall be partakers of
   it. For then shall they be in security, who are not in security now;
   and again then shall they fear, who will not fear now. Unto this
   waiting, and for this hope's sake, have we been made Christians. Is not
   our hope not of this world? Let us then not love the world. From the
   love of this world have we been called away, that we may hope for and
   love another. In this world ought we to abstain from all unlawful
   desires, to have, that is, "our loins girded;" and to be fervent and to
   shine in good works, that is, to have "our lights burning." For the
   Lord Himself said to His disciples in another place of the Gospel, "No
   man lighteth a candle and putteth it under a bushel, but on a
   candlestick, that it may give light unto all that are in the house."
   [3421] And to show of what He was speaking, He subjoined and said, "Let
   your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
   glorify your Father which is in heaven." [3422]

   2. Therefore He would that "our loins should be girded, and our lights
   burning." [3423] What is, "our loins girded"? "Depart from evil."
   [3424] What is to "burn"? What is to have our "lights burning"? It is
   this, "And do good." What is that which He said afterwards, "And ye
   yourselves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when He will return
   from the wedding:" [3425] except that which follows in that Psalm,
   "Seek after peace, and ensue it"? [3426] These three things, that is,
   "abstaining from evil, and doing good," and the hope of everlasting
   reward, are recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, where it is written,
   that Paul taught them of "temperance and righteousness," [3427] and the
   hope of eternal life. To temperance belongs, "let your loins be
   girded." To righteousness, "and your lights burning." To the hope of
   eternal life, the waiting for the Lord. So then, "depart from evil,"
   this is temperance, these are the loins girded: "and do good," this is
   righteousness, these are the "lights burning;" "seek peace, and ensue
   it," this is the waiting for the world to come: therefore, "Be ye like
   unto men that wait for their Lord, when He will come from the wedding."

   3. Having then these precepts and promises, why seek we on earth for
   "good days," where we cannot find them? For I know that ye do seek
   them, when ye are either sick, or in any of the tribulations, which in
   this world abound. For when life draws towards its close, the old man
   is full of complaints, and with no joys. Amid all the tribulations by
   which mankind is worn away, men seek for nothing but "good days," and
   wish for a long life, which here they cannot have. For even a man's
   long life is narrowed within so short a span to the wide extent of all
   ages, as if it were but one drop to the whole sea. What then is man's
   life, even that which is called a long one? They call that a long life,
   which even in this world's course is short; and as I have said, groans
   abound even unto the decrepitude of old age. This at the most is but
   brief, and of short duration; and yet how eagerly is it sought by men,
   with how great diligence, with how great toil, with how great
   carefulness, with how great watchfulness, with how great labour do men
   seek to live here for a long time, and to grow old. And yet this very
   living long, what is it but running to the end? Thou hadst yesterday,
   and thou dost wish also to have to-morrow. But when this day and
   to-morrow are passed, thou hast them not. Therefore thou dost wish for
   the day to break, that that may draw near to thee whither thou hast no
   wish to come. Thou makest some annual festival with thy friends, and
   hearest it there said to thee by thy well-wishers, "Mayest thou live
   many years," thou dost wish that what they have said, may come to pass.
   What? Dost thou wish that years and years may come, and the end of
   these years come not? Thy wishes are contrary to one another; thou dost
   wish to walk on, and dost not wish to reach the end.

   4. But if, as I have said, there is so great care in men, as to desire
   with daily, great and perpetual labours, to die somewhat later: with
   how great cause ought they to strive, that they may never die? Of this,
   no one will think. Day by day "good days" are sought for in this world,
   where they are not found; yet no one wishes so to live, that he may
   arrive there where they are found. Therefore the same Scripture
   admonishes us, and says, "Who is the man that wisheth for life, and
   loveth to see good days?" [3428] Scripture so asked the question, as
   that It knew well what answer would be given It; knowing that all men
   would "seek for life and good days." In accordance with their desire It
   asked the question, as if the answer would be given It from the heart
   of all, "I wish it;" It said thus, "Who is the man that wisheth for
   life, and loveth to see good days?" Just as even at this very hour in
   which I am speaking to you, when ye heard me say, "Who is the man that
   wisheth for life, and loveth to see good days?" ye all answered in your
   heart, "I." For so do I too, who am speaking with you, "wish for life
   and good days;" what ye seek, that do I seek also.

   5. Just as if gold were necessary for us all, and we all, I as well as
   you, were wishing to get at the gold, and there was some anywhere in a
   field of yours, in a place subject to your power, and I were to see you
   searching for it, and were to say to you, "What are ye searching for?"
   ye were to answer me, "Gold." And I were to say to you, "Ye are
   searching for gold, and I am searching for gold too: what ye are
   searching for, I am searching for; but ye are not searching for it
   where we can find it. Listen to me then, where we can find it; I am not
   taking it away from you, I am showing you the spot;" yea, let us all
   follow Him, who knows where what we are seeking for, is. So now too
   seeing that ye desire "life and good days," we cannot say to you, "Do
   not desire life and good days;'" but this we say, "Do not seek for life
   and good days' here in this world, where good days' cannot be." Is not
   this life itself like unto death? Now these days here hasten and pass
   away: for to-day has shut out yesterday; tomorrow only rises that it
   may shut out to-day. These days themselves have no abiding; wherefore
   wouldest thou abide with them? Your desire then whereby ye wish for
   "life and good days," I not only do not repress, but I even more
   strongly inflame. By all means "seek" for "life, seek for good days;"
   but let them be sought there, where they can be found.

   6. For would ye with me hear His counsel, who knoweth where "good days"
   and where "life" is? Hear it not from me, but together with me. For One
   says to us, "Come, ye children, hearken unto Me." And let us run
   together, and stand, and prick up our ears, and with our hearts
   understand the Father, who hath said, "Come, ye children, hearken unto
   Me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord." [3429] And then follows
   what he would teach us, and to what end the fear of the Lord is useful.
   "Who is the man that wisheth life, and loveth to see good days?" We all
   answer, "We wish it." Let us listen then to what follows, "Refrain thy
   tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile." [3430] Now
   say, "I wish it." Just now when I said, "Who is the man that wisheth
   for life, and loveth to see good days?" we all answered, "I." Come
   then, let some one now answer "I." So then, "Refrain thy tongue from
   evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile." Now say, "I." Wouldest
   thou then have "good days" and "life," and wouldest thou not "refrain
   thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile"? Alert to
   the reward, slow to the work! And to whom if he does not work is the
   reward rendered? I would that in thy house thou wouldest render the
   reward even to him that does work! For to him that works not, I am sure
   thou dost not render it. And why? Because thou owest nothing to him
   that does not work! And God hath a reward proposed. What reward? "Life
   and good days," which life we all desire, and unto which days we all
   strive to come. The promised reward He will give us. What reward? "Life
   and good days." And what are "good days"? Life without end, rest
   without labour.

   7. Great is the reward He hath set before us: in so great a reward as
   is set before us, let us see what He hath commanded us. For enkindled
   by the reward of so great a promise, and by the love of the reward, let
   us make ready at once our strength, our sides, our arms, to do His
   bidding. Is it as if He were to command us to carry heavy burdens, to
   dig something it may be, or to raise up some machine? No, no such
   laborious thing hath He enjoined thee, but hath enjoined thee only to
   "refrain" that member which amongst all thy members thou dost move so
   quickly. "Refrain thy tongue from evil." It is no labour to erect a
   building, and is it a labour to hold in the tongue? "Refrain thy tongue
   from evil." Speak no lie, speak no revilings, speak no slanders, speak
   no false witnesses, speak no blasphemies. "Refrain thy tongue from
   evil." See how angry thou art, if any one speaks evil of thee. As thou
   art angry with another, when he speaks evil of thee; so be thou angry
   with thyself, when thou speakest evil of another. "Let thy lips speak
   no guile." What is in thine heart within, be that spoken out. Let not
   thy breast conceal one thing, and thy tongue utter another. "Depart
   from evil, and do good." For how should I say, "Clothe the naked," to
   him who up to this time would strip him that is clothed? For he that
   oppresses his fellow-citizen, how can he take in the stranger? So then
   in proper order, first "depart from evil," and "do good;" first "gird
   up thy loins," and then "light the lamp." And when thou hast done this,
   wait in assured hope for "life and good days." "Seek peace, and ensue
   it;" and then with a good face wilt thou say unto the Lord, "I have
   done what Thou hast bidden, render me what Thou hast promised."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3417] Matt. xxviii. 20.

   [3418] Rom. vi. 9.

   [3419] John i. 10.

   [3420] The troubles through the incursions of the barbarian tribes, as
   heralds of the end. See St. Cyprian, Ad Demetr. 2, p. 201, Oxf. tr.; De
   Mort. v. 2, p. 216, 7.

   [3421] Matt. v. 15.

   [3422] Matt. v. 16.

   [3423] Luke xii. 35.

   [3424] Ps. xxxiv. 14.

   [3425] Luke xii. 36.

   [3426] Ps. xxxiv. 14.

   [3427] Acts xxiv. 25.

   [3428] Ps. xxxiv. 12.

   [3429] Ps. xxxiv. 11.

   [3430] Ps. xxxiv. 13.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LIX.

   [CIX. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xii. 56, 58, "Ye know how to interpret
   the face of the Earth and the Heaven," etc.; and of the words, "for as
   thou art going with thine adversary before the magistrate, on the way
   give diligence to be quit of him," etc.

   1. We have heard the Gospel, and in it the Lord reproving those who
   knew how to discern the face of the sky, and know not how to discover
   the time of faith, the kingdom of heaven which is at hand. Now this He
   said to the Jews; but His words reach even unto us. Now the Lord Jesus
   Christ Himself began the preaching of His Gospel in this way; "Repent
   ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." [3431] In like manner too
   John the Baptist and His forerunner began thus; "Repent ye, for the
   kingdom of heaven is at hand." [3432] And now the Lord rebuketh those
   who would not repent, when "the kingdom of heaven was at hand." "The
   kingdom of heaven," as He saith Himself, "will not come with
   observation." [3433] And again He saith, "The kingdom of heaven is
   within you." [3434] Let every one then wisely receive the admonitions
   of the Master, [3435] that he may not lose the season of the mercy of
   the Saviour, which is now being dealt out, as long as the human race is
   spared. For to this end is man spared, that he may be converted, and
   that he may not be to be condemned. God only knoweth when the end of
   the world shall come: nevertheless now is the time of faith. Whether
   the end of the world shall find any of us here, I know not; and perhaps
   it will not find us. Our time is very near to each one of us, seeing we
   are mortal. We walk in the midst of chances. If we were made of glass,
   we should have to fear chances less than we have. What is more fragile
   than a vessel of glass? And yet it is kept, and lasts for ages. For
   though the chances of a fall are feared for the vessel of glass, yet
   there is no fear of fever or old age for it. We then are more fragile
   and more infirm; because all the chances which are incessant in human
   things, we doubtless through our frailness are in daily dread of; and
   if these chances come not, yet time goes on; a man avoids this stroke,
   can he avoid his end? he avoids accidents which happen from without,
   can that which is born within be driven away? Again, now the entrails
   engender worms, now some other disease attacks on a sudden; lastly, let
   a man be spared ever so long, at last when old age comes, there is no
   way of putting off that.

   2. Wherefore let us give ear to the Lord, let us do within ourselves
   what He hath enjoined. Let us see who that adversary is, of whom He
   hath put us in fear, saying, "If thou goest with thine adversary to the
   magistrate, give diligence in the way to be delivered from him; lest
   haply he deliver thee to the magistrate, and the magistrate to the
   officer, and thou be cast into prison, from whence thou shalt not come
   out, till thou payest the very last farthing." [3436] Who is this
   "adversary"? If the devil; we have been delivered from him already.
   What a price was given for us that we might be redeemed from him! Of
   which the Apostle says, speaking of this our redemption, "Who hath
   delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into
   the kingdom of the Son of his love." [3437] We have been redeemed, we
   have renounced the devil; how shall we "give diligence to be delivered
   from him," that he make us not, as sinners, his captives again? But
   this is not the "adversary" of whom the Lord gives us warning. For in
   another place another Evangelist has so expressed it, that if we join
   both expressions together, and compare both expressions of the two
   Evangelists with each other, we shall soon understand who this
   adversary is. For see, what did Luke say here? "When thou goest with
   thine adversary to the magistrate, give diligence in the way to be
   delivered from him." [3438] But the other Evangelist has expressed this
   same thing thus: "Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art
   in the way with him." All the rest is alike: "Lest haply the adversary
   deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer,
   and thou be cast into prison." [3439] Both Evangelists have explained
   this alike. One said, "Give diligence in the way to be delivered from
   him;" the other said, "Agree with him." For thou wilt not be able to
   "be delivered from him," unless thou "agree with him." Wouldest thou
   "be delivered from him? Agree with him." But what? is it the devil with
   whom the Christian ought to "agree"?

   3. Let us then seek out this "adversary," with whom we ought to "agree,
   lest he deliver us to the judge, and the judge to the officer;" let us
   seek him out, "and agree with him." If thou sin, the word of God is
   thine adversary. [3440] For example, it is a delight to thee perchance
   to be drunken; it says to thee, "Do it not." It is a delight to thee to
   frequent the spectacles, and such triflings; it says to thee, "Do it
   not." It is a delight to thee to commit adultery; the word of God saith
   to thee, "Do it not." In what sins soever thou wouldest do thine own
   will, it saith to thee, "Do it not." It is the adversary of thy will,
   till it become the author of thy salvation. O how goodly, how useful an
   "adversary"! It does not seek our will, but our advantage. It is our
   "adversary," as long as we are our own adversaries. As long as thou art
   thine own enemy, thou hast the word of God thine enemy; be thine own
   friend, and thou art in agreement with it. "Thou shalt do no murder;"
   give ear, and thou hast "agreed" with it. "Thou shalt not steal;" give
   ear, and thou hast "agreed" with it. "Thou shalt not commit adultery;"
   give ear, and thou hast "agreed" with it. "Thou shalt not give false
   witness;" give ear, and thou hast "agreed" with it. "Thou shalt not
   covet thy neighbour's wife;" give ear, and thou hast agreed with it.
   "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's goods;" [3441] give ear, and thou
   hast "agreed" with it. In all these things thou hast agreed with this
   "thine adversary," and what hast thou lost to thyself? Not only hast
   thou lost nothing; but thou hast even found thyself, who hadst been
   lost. "The way," is this life; if we shall "agree with the adversary,"
   if we shall come to terms with him; when "the way" is ended, we shall
   not fear the "judge, the officer, the prison.

   4. When is "the way" ended? It is not ended at the same hour to all.
   Each several man hath his hour when he shall end his "way." This life
   is called "the way;" when thou hast ended this life, thou hast ended
   "the way." We are going on, and the very living is advancing. Unless
   peradventure ye imagine that time advances, and we stand still! It
   cannot be. As time advances, we too advance; and years do not come to
   us, but rather go away. Greatly are men mistaken when they say, "This
   boy has little good sense yet, but years will come on him, and he will
   be wise." Consider what thou sayest. "Will come on him," thou hast
   said; "I will show that they go away," whereas thou sayest, "they come
   on." And hear how easily I prove it. Let us suppose that we have known
   the number of his years from his birth; for instance (that we may wish
   him well) he has to live fourscore years, he is to arrive at old age.
   Write down fourscore years. One year he has lived; how many hast thou
   in the total? how many hast thou down? Fourscore! Deduct one. He has
   lived ten; seventy remain. He has lived twenty; sixty remain. Yet
   surely, it will be said, they did come; what can this mean? Our years
   come that they may depart; they come, I say that they may go. For they
   do not come, that they may abide with us, but as they pass through us,
   they wear us out, and make us less and less strong. Such is "the way"
   into which we have come. What then have we to do with that "adversary,"
   that is, with the word of God? "Agree with him." For thou knowest not
   when "the way" may be ended. When "the way" is ended, there remain "the
   judge," and "the officer," and "the prison." But if thou maintain a
   good will to "thine adversary," and "agree with him;" instead of a
   "judge," shalt thou find a father, instead of a cruel "officer," an
   Angel taking thee away into Abraham's bosom, instead of a "prison,"
   paradise. How rapidly hast thou changed all things "in the way,"
   because thou hast "agreed with thine adversary"!
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3431] Matt. iv. 17.

   [3432] Matt. iii. 2.

   [3433] Luke xvii. 20.

   [3434] Luke xvii. 21.

   [3435] Præceptoris.

   [3436] Luke xii. 58, 59.

   [3437] Col. i. 13.

   [3438] Luke xii. 58.

   [3439] Matt. v. 25.

   [3440] Serm. ix. 3. De decem chordis.

   [3441] Exod. xx. 13, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LX.

   [CX. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xiii. 6, where we are told of the
   fig-tree, which bare no fruit for three years; and of the woman which
   was in an infirmity eighteen years; and on the words of the ninth
   Psalm, v. 19, "Arise, O Lord; let not man prevail: let the nations be
   judged in thy sight."

   1. Touching "the fig-tree" which had its three years' trial, and bare
   no fruit, and "the woman which was in an infirmity eighteen years,"
   hearken to what the Lord may grant me to say. The fig-tree is the human
   race. And the three years are the three times; one before the Law, the
   second under the Law, the third under grace. Now there is nothing
   unsuitable in understanding by "the fig-tree" the human race. For when
   the first man sinned, he covered his nakedness with fig-leaves; [3442]
   covered those members, from which we derive our birth. For what before
   his sin should have been his glory, after sin became his shame. So
   before that, "they were naked, and were not ashamed." [3443] For they
   had no reason to blush, when no sin had gone before; nor could they
   blush for their Creator's works, because they had not yet mingled any
   evil work of their own with the good works of their Creator. For they
   had not yet eaten of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, of which
   they had been forbidden to eat. After then that they had eaten and
   sinned, the human race sprang from them; that is, man from man, debtor
   from debtor, mortal from mortal, sinner from sinner. In this "tree"
   then he entitles those, who through the whole range of time would not
   bear fruit; and for this cause the axe was hanging over the unfruitful
   tree. The gardener intercedes for it, punishment is deferred, that help
   may be administered. Now the gardener who intercedes, is every saint
   who within the Church prays for those who are without the Church. And
   what does he pray? "Lord, let it alone this year also;" that is, in
   this time of grace, spare the sinners, spare the unbelievers, spare the
   barren, spare the unfruitful. "I will dig about it, and put a basket of
   dung about it; if it bear fruit, well; but if not, thou shalt come and
   cut it down." [3444] "Thou shalt come:" When? Thou shalt come in
   judgment, when Thou shalt come to judge the quick and dead. Meanwhile
   they are spared. But what is the "digging"? What is the "digging about
   it," but the teaching lowliness and repentance? For a ditch is low
   ground. The basket of dung understand in its good effects. It is
   filthy, but it produces fruit. The gardener's filth is the sinner's
   sorrows. They who repent, repent in filthy robes; if, that is, they
   understand aright, and repent in truth. To this tree then is it said,
   "Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." [3445]

   2. What is that "woman who was in an infirmity eighteen years"? In six
   days God finished His works. Three times six are eighteen. What the
   "three years" then in "the tree" signified, that do the "eighteen
   years" in this woman. She was bent down, she could not look up; because
   in vain did she hear, "Up with your hearts." But the Lord made her
   straight. There is hope then, for the children, that is, even until the
   day of judgment come. Man ascribes much to himself. Yet what is man? A
   righteous man is something great. But yet a righteous man is righteous
   only by the grace of God. "For what is man, save that thou art mindful
   of him?" [3446] Wouldest thou see what man is? "All men are liars."
   [3447] We have chanted, "Arise, Lord; let not man prevail." [3448] What
   is, "let not man prevail"? Were not the Apostles men? Were not Martyrs
   men? The Lord Jesus Himself, without ceasing to be God, vouchsafed to
   be Man. What then is, "Arise, Lord; let not man prevail"? If "all men
   are liars; arise," Truth, "let not" falsehood "prevail." If man then
   would be anything good, it must not be of anything of his own. For if
   he should wish to be anything of his own he will be "a liar." If he
   would wish to be true, he must be so of that which is from God, not of
   anything of his own.

   3. Therefore, "Arise, Lord; let not man prevail." So much did lying
   prevail before the flood, that after the flood only eight men remained.
   [3449] By them the earth was again replenished with lying men, and out
   of them was elected the people of God. Many miracles were wrought,
   divine benefits imparted. They were brought right through to the land
   of promise, delivered from Egyptian bondage: Prophets were raised up
   among them, they received the temple, they received the priesthood,
   they received the anointing, they received the Law. Yet of this very
   people was it said afterwards, "The strange children have lied unto
   me." [3450] At last He was sent who had been promised afore by the
   Prophets. "Let not man prevail," even the more, because that God was
   made Man. But even He, though He did divine works, was despised, though
   He showed forth so many acts of mercy, He was apprehended, He was
   scourged, He was hanged. Thus far "did man prevail," to apprehend the
   Son of God, to scourge the Son of God, to crown the Son of God with
   thorns, to hang the Son of God upon the tree. So far "did man prevail:"
   how far, but up to the time that having been taken down from the tree,
   He was laid in the sepulchre? If He had remained there, man would have
   "prevailed" indeed. But this prophecy addresses the very Lord Jesus
   Himself, saying, "Arise, Lord, let not man prevail." O Lord, Thou hast
   vouchsafed to come in the flesh, the Word made Flesh. The Word above
   us, the Flesh among us, the Word-flesh [3451] between God and Man: Thou
   didst choose a virgin to be born from according to the flesh, when Thou
   wast to be conceived, Thou didst find a Virgin; when Thou wast born,
   Thou didst leave a Virgin. But Thou wast not acknowledged; Thou wast
   Seen, and yet wast hidden. Infirmity was seen, Power was hidden. All
   this was done, that Thou mightest shed that Blood, which is our Price.
   Thou didst so great miracles, didst give health to the weaknesses of
   the sick, didst show forth many acts of mercy, and receivedst evil for
   good. They mocked Thee, Thou didst hang upon the tree; the ungodly
   wagged their heads before Thee, and said, "If Thou be the Son of God,
   come down from the cross." [3452] Hadst Thou then lost Thy power, or
   rather wast Thou showing forth Thy Patience? and yet they mocked Thee,
   and yet they derided Thee, yet, when Thou wast slain, they went away as
   if victorious. Lo, Thou art laid in the sepulchre: "Arise, Lord, let
   not man prevail." "Let not" the ungodly enemy "prevail, let not" the
   blind Jew "prevail." For when Thou wert crucified, the Jew in his
   blindness seemed to himself to have "prevailed." "Arise, Lord, let not
   man prevail." It is done, yea, it is done. And now what remains, but
   that "the nations be judged in thy sight"? For He hath risen again, as
   ye know, and ascended into heaven; and from thence He shall come to
   judge the quick and the dead.

   4. Ah! unfruitful tree, mock not, because thou art yet spared; the axe
   is delayed, be not [3453] thou secure; He will come and thou shalt be
   cut down. Believe that He will come. All these things which now ye see,
   once were not. Once the Christian people were not over the whole world.
   It was read of in prophecy, not seen in the earth; now it is both read
   and seen. Thus was the Church herself completed. It was not said to
   her, "See, O daughter, and hear;" but, "Hear and see." [3454] Hear the
   predictions, see the completions. As then, my beloved Brethren, Christ
   had once not been born of a Virgin, but His birth was promised, and He
   was born; He had once not done His miracles, they were promised, and He
   did them: He had not yet suffered, it was promised, and so it came to
   pass: He had not risen again, it was foretold, and so fulfilled: His
   Name was not throughout the world, it was foretold, and so fulfilled:
   the idols were not destroyed and broken down, it was foretold, and so
   fulfilled: heretics had not assailed the Church, it was foretold, and
   so fulfilled. So also the Day of Judgment is not yet, but seeing it
   hath been foretold, it shall be fulfilled. Can it be that He who in so
   many things hath shown Himself true, should be false touching the Day
   of Judgment? He hath given us a bond [3455] of His promises. For God
   hath made Himself a debtor, not by owing ought, that is, not by
   borrowing; but by promising. We cannot therefore say to Him, "Give back
   what Thou hast received." Since "who hath first given to Him, and it
   shall be recompensed unto him again?" [3456] We cannot say to Him,
   "Give what Thou hast received;" but we say without [3457] scruple,
   "Give what Thou hast promised."

   5. For hence it is that we are bold to say, day by day, "Thy kingdom
   come;" [3458] that when His kingdom comes, we too may reign with Him.
   Which hath been promised to us in these words; "Then will I say unto
   them, Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom prepared for
   you from the beginning of the world." [3459] But assuredly only if we
   shall have done what follows in that place. "For I was an hungred, and
   ye gave Me meat," etc. He made these promises to our fathers; but He
   hath given us a security, [3460] for us too to read. If He who hath
   vouchsafed to give us this security, were to make a reckoning with us
   and say, "Read my debts, the debts, that is, of my promises, and reckon
   up what I have already paid, and reckon also what I still owe; see how
   many I have paid already; and what I owe is but little; will ye for
   that little that remains, think Me an untrustworthy promiser?" What
   should we have to answer against this most evident truth? Let him then
   who is barren repent, and bear "fruit worthy of repentance." He that is
   bent down, who looks only on the earth, rejoices in earthly happiness,
   who thinks this the only happy life, where he may be happy, and who
   believes no other can be; whosoever he be that is so bent down, let him
   be made straight; if he cannot by himself, let him call upon God. For
   was that woman made straight by herself? Woe had it been for her, if He
   had not stretched out His Hand.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3442] Gen. iii. 7.

   [3443] Gen. ii. 25.

   [3444] Luke xiii. 8, 9.

   [3445] Matt. iii. 2.

   [3446] Ps. viii. 4.

   [3447] Ps. cxvi. 11.

   [3448] Ps. ix. 19.

   [3449] 1 Pet. iii. 20.

   [3450] Ps. xvii. 45, Sept. (cxliv. 11).

   [3451] Conf. B. x. 67-70 (42, 43).

   [3452] Matt. xxvii. 40.

   [3453] A paranomasia not to be preserved in the original, dilata est
   securis, noli esse secura.

   [3454] Ps. xliv. 11, Sept. (xlv. 10, English version).

   [3455] Chirographum.

   [3456] Rom. xi. 35.

   [3457] Planè.

   [3458] Matt. vi. 10.

   [3459] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [3460] Cautionem.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXI.

   [CXI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xiii. 21 and 23, where the kingdom of
   God is said to be "like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in
   three measures of meal;" and of that which is written in the same
   chapter, "Lord, are they few that are saved?"

   1. "The three measures of meal" [3461] of which the Lord spake, is the
   human race. Recollect the deluge; three only remained, from whom the
   rest were to be re-peopled. Noe had three sons, by them was repaired
   the human race. That holy "woman who hid the leaven," is Wisdom. Lo,
   the whole world crieth out in the Church of God, "I know that the Lord
   is great." [3462] Yet doubtless there are but few who are saved. Ye
   remember a question which was lately set before us out of the Gospel,
   "Lord," it was said, "are there few that be saved?" [3463] What said
   the Lord to this? He did not say, "Not few, but many are they who are
   saved." He did not say this. But what said He, when He had heard, "Are
   there few that be saved? Strive to enter by the strait gate." [3464]
   When thou hearest then, "Are there few that be saved?" the Lord
   confirmed what He heard. Through the "strait gate" but "few" can
   "enter." In another place He saith Himself, "Strait and narrow is the
   way which leadeth unto life, and few there be that go thereby: but
   broad and spacious is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many
   there be which walk thereby." [3465] Why rejoice we in great numbers?
   Give ear to me, ye "few." I know that ye are "many," who hear me, yet
   but "few" of you hear to obey. I see the floor, I look for the corn.
   And hardly is the corn seen, when the floor is being threshed; but the
   time is coming, that it shall be winnowed. But few then are saved in
   comparison of the many that shall perish. For these same "few" will
   constitute in themselves a great mass. When the Winnower shall come
   with His fan in His Hand, "He will cleanse His floor, and lay up the
   wheat into the garner; but the chaff He will burn with unquenchable
   fire." [3466] Let not the chaff scoff at the wheat; in this He speaketh
   truth, and deceiveth no one. Be ye then in yourselves among many a
   many, few though ye be in comparison of a certain many. So large a mass
   is to come out of this floor, as to fill the garner of heaven. For the
   Lord Christ would not contradict Himself, who hath said, "Many there
   are who enter in by the narrow gate, many who go to ruin through the
   wide gate;" contradict Himself, who hath in another place said, "Many
   shall come from the East and West." [3467] "Many" then are the "few;"
   both "few" and "many." Are the "few" one sort, and the "many" another?
   No. But the "few" are themselves the "many;" "few" in comparison of the
   lost, "many in the society of the Angels. Hearken, dearly Beloved. The
   Apocalypse hath this written; "After this I beheld of all languages,
   and nations, and tribes, a great multitude, which no man can number,
   coming with white robes and palms." [3468] This is the mass of the
   saints. With how much clearer voice will the floor say, when it has
   been fanned, separated from the crowd of ungodly, and evil, and false
   Christians, when those who "press" and do not "touch" (for a certain
   woman in the Gospel "touched," the crowd "pressed" Christ), shall have
   been severed unto everlasting fire; when all they then, who are to be
   damned shall have been separated off, with how great assurance will the
   purified mass, standing at the Right Hand, fearing now for itself the
   admixture of no evil men, nor the loss of any of the good, now about to
   reign with Christ, say, "I know that the Lord is great"! [3469]

   2. If then, my Brethren (I am speaking to the corn), if they
   acknowledge what I say, predestined unto life eternal, let them speak
   by their works, not by their voices. I am constrained to speak to you,
   what I ought not. For I ought to find in you matter of praise, not to
   seek subjects for admonition. Yet see I will say but a few words, I
   will not dwell upon it. Acknowledge the duty of hospitality, thereby
   some have attained unto God. Thou takest in some stranger, whose
   companion in the way thou thyself also art; for strangers are we all.
   He is a Christian who, even in his own house and in his own country,
   acknowledges himself to be a stranger. For our country is above, there
   we shall not be strangers. For every one here below, even in his own
   house, is a stranger. If he be not a stranger, let him not pass on from
   hence. If pass on he must, he is a stranger. Let him not deceive
   himself, a stranger he is; whether he will or not, he is a stranger.
   And he leaves that house to his children, one stranger to other
   strangers. Why? If thou wert at an inn, wouldest thou not depart when
   another comes? The same thou doest even in thine own house. Thy father
   left a place to thee, thou wilt some day leave it to thy children.
   Neither dost thou abide here, as one who is to abide always, nor to
   those who are so to abide, wilt thou leave it. If we are all passing
   away, let us do something which cannot pass away, that when we shall
   have passed away, and have come thither whence we may not pass away, we
   may find our good works there. Christ is the keeper, why dost thou fear
   lest thou shouldest lose what thou spendest on the poor? "Let us turn
   to the Lord," etc.

   And after the Sermon.

   I suggest to you, Beloved, what ye know already. To-morrow breaks the
   anniversary day of the venerable [3470] lord Aurelius' ordination; he
   asks and admonishes you, dear Brethren, by my humble ministry, that ye
   would be so good [3471] as to meet together with all devotion at the
   basilica of Faustus. Thanks be to God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3461] Luke xiii. 21.

   [3462] Ps. cxxxv. 5.

   [3463] Luke xiii. 23.

   [3464] Luke xiii. 24.

   [3465] Matt. vii. 13, 14.

   [3466] Luke iii. 17.

   [3467] Matt. viii. 11.

   [3468] Rev. vii. 9.

   [3469] Ps. cxxxv. 5.

   [3470] Senis.

   [3471] Dignemini.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXII.

   [XCII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xiv. 16, "A certain man made a great
   supper," etc.

   Delivered in the basilica Restituta. [3472]

   1. Holy lessons have been set forth before us, to which we should both
   give ear, and upon which by the Lord's help I would deliver some
   observations. In the Apostolic lesson thanks are rendered unto the Lord
   for the faith of the Gentiles, of course, because it was His work. In
   the Psalm we have said, "O God of hosts, turn us, and show us Thy Face,
   and we shall be saved." [3473] In the Gospel we have been called to a
   supper; yea, rather others have been called, we not called, but led;
   not only led, but even forced. For so have we heard, that "a certain
   Man made a great supper." [3474] Who is this Man, but "the Mediator
   between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus"? [3475] He sent that those
   who had been invited might come, for the hour was now come, that they
   should come. Who are they who had been invited, but those who had been
   called by the Prophets who were sent before? When? Of old, ever since
   the Prophets were sent, they invited to Christ's supper. They were sent
   then to the people of Israel. Often were they sent, often did they call
   men, to come at the hour of supper. But they received those who invited
   them, refused the supper. What means "they received those who invited
   them, refused the supper"? They read the Prophets and killed Christ.
   But when they killed Him, then though they knew it not, they prepared a
   Supper for us. When the Supper was now prepared, when Christ had been
   offered up, when the Supper of the Lord, which the faithful know, had
   been set forth after the resurrection of Christ, and established by His
   Hands and Mouth, were the Apostles sent to them, to whom the Prophets
   had been sent before. "Come ye to the supper."

   2. They who would not come made excuses. And how did they excuse
   themselves? There were three excuses: "One said, I have bought a farm,
   [3476] and I go to see it; have me excused. Another said, I have bought
   five pairs of oxen, and I go to prove them; I pray thee have me
   excused. A third said, I have married a wife, have me excused; I cannot
   come." [3477] Do we suppose that these are not the excuses, which
   hinder all men, who decline to come to this supper? Let us look into
   them, discuss, find them out; but only that we may beware. In the
   purchase of the farm, the spirit of domination is marked out; therefore
   pride is rebuked. For men are delighted to have a farm, to hold, to
   possess it, to have men in it under them, to have dominion. An evil
   vice, the first vice. For the first man wished to have dominion, in
   that he would not that any should have dominion over him. What is to
   have dominion, but to take pleasure in one's own power? There is a
   greater power, let us submit ourselves to it, that we may be able to be
   safe. "I have bought a farm, have me excused." Having discovered pride,
   he would not come.

   3. "Another said, I have bought five pairs of oxen." Would it not have
   been enough, "I have bought oxen"? Something beyond doubt there is,
   which by its very obscurity challenges us to seek out, and understand;
   and in that it is shut, He exhorteth us to knock. The five pairs of
   oxen are the senses of this body. There are numbered five senses of
   this body, as is known to all; and they who, it may be, do not consider
   it, will doubtless perceive it on being reminded of it. There are then
   found to be five senses of this body. In the eyes is the sight, the
   hearing in the ears, the smell in the nose, the taste in the mouth, the
   touch in all the members. We have perception of white and black, and
   things coloured in whatever way, light and dark, by the sight. Harsh
   and musical sounds, we have perception of by the hearing. Of sweet and
   offensive smells, we have perception by the smell. Of things sweet and
   bitter by the taste. Of things hard and soft, smooth and rough, warm
   and cold, heavy and light, by the touch. They are five, and they are
   pairs. Now that they are pairs, is seen most easily in the case of the
   three first senses. There are two eyes, two ears, two nostrils; see
   three pairs. In the mouth, that is in the sense of taste, a certain
   doubling is found, because nothing affects the taste, unless it is
   touched by the tongue and the palate. The pleasure of the flesh which
   pertains to the touch, has this doubling in a less obvious way. For
   there is both an outer and an inner touch. And so it too is double. Why
   are they called pairs of oxen? Because by these senses of the body,
   earthly things are sought for. For oxen turn up the earth. So there are
   men far off from faith, given up to earthly things, occupied in the
   things of the flesh; who will not believe anything but what they attain
   to by the five senses of their body. In those five senses do they lay
   down for themselves the rules of their whole will. "I will not
   believe," says one, "anything but what I see. See, here is what I know,
   and am sure of. Such a thing is white, or black, or round, or square,
   or coloured so and so; this I know, am sensible of, have a hold of;
   nature itself teaches it me. I am not forced to believe what you cannot
   show me. Or it is a voice: I perceive that it is a voice; it sings
   well, it sings ill, it is sweet, it is harsh. I know, I know this, it
   has come to me. There is a good or a bad smell: I know, I perceive it.
   This is sweet, this is bitter; this is salt, this insipid. I know not
   what you would tell me more. By the touch I know what is hard, what is
   soft; what is smooth, what is rough; what is warm, and what cold. What
   more would you show me?"

   4. By such an impediment was our Apostle Thomas held back, who as to
   the Lord Christ, the resurrection that is of Christ, would not believe
   even his own eyes only. "Unless," says he, "I put my fingers into the
   places of the nails and wounds, and unless I put my hand into His side,
   I will not believe." [3478] And the Lord who could have risen again
   without any vestige of a wound, kept the scars, that they might be
   touched by the doubting Apostle, and the wounds of his heart be healed.
   And yet as designing to call to His supper others, against the excuse
   of "the five pairs of oxen," He said, "Blessed they who do not see, and
   believe." [3479] We, my Brethren, who have been called to this supper,
   have not been kept back by "these five pairs." For we have not in this
   age desired to see the Face of the Lord's Body, nor have we longed to
   hear the Voice proceeding out of the mouth of that Body; we have not
   sought in Him for any passing [3480] odour. A certain "woman anointed
   Him with most costly ointment," that "house was filled with the odour;"
   [3481] but we were not there; lo, we did not smell, yet we believe. He
   gave to the disciples the Supper consecrated by His Own Hands; but we
   did not sit down at that Feast, and yet we daily eat this same Supper
   by faith. And do not think it strange that in that supper which He gave
   with His Own Hand, one was present without faith: the faith that
   appeared, afterwards was more than a compensation for that
   faithlessness then. Paul was not there who believed, Judas was there
   who betrayed. How many now too in this same Supper, though they saw not
   then that table, nor beheld with their eyes, nor tasted with their
   mouths, the bread which the Lord took in His Hands, yet because it is
   the same as is now prepared, how many now also in this same Supper,
   "eat and drink judgment to themselves"? [3482]

   5. But whence arose an occasion, so to say, to the Lord, to speak of
   this supper? One of them that sat at meat with Him (for He was at a
   feast, whither He had been invited), had said, "Blessed are they who
   eat bread in the kingdom of God." [3483] He sighed as though after
   distant things, and the Bread Himself was sitting down before him. Who
   is the Bread of the kingdom of God, but He who saith, "I am the Living
   Bread which came down from heaven"? [3484] Do not get thy mouth ready,
   but thine heart. On this occasion it was that the parable of this
   supper was set forth. Lo, we believe in Christ, we receive Him with
   faith. In receiving Him we know what to think of. We receive but
   little, and we are nourished in heart. It is not then what is seen, but
   what is believed, that feeds us. Therefore we too have not sought for
   that outward sense; nor have we said, "Let them believe who have seen
   with their eyes, and handled with their hands the Lord Himself after
   His resurrection, if what is said be true; we do not touch Him, why
   should we believe?" If we were to entertain such thoughts, we should be
   kept back from the supper by those "five pairs of oxen." That ye may
   know, Brethren, that not the gratification of these five senses, which
   softens and ministers pleasure, but a kind of curiosity was denoted, He
   did not say, "I have bought five pairs of oxen,' and I go to feed
   them;" but, "I go to prove them." He who wishes to "prove" by "the
   pairs of oxen," does not wish to be in doubt, just as St. Thomas by
   these "pairs" did not wish to be in doubt. "Let me see, let me touch,
   let me put in my fingers." "Behold,' saith the Lord, put in thy fingers
   along My Side, and be not unbelieving.' [3485] For thy sake have I been
   slain; at the place which thou wishest to touch, have I shed My Blood,
   that I might redeem thee; and dost thou still doubt of Me, unless thou
   touch Me? Behold, this too I grant; behold, this too I show thee;
   touch, and believe; find out the place of My wound, heal the wound of
   thy doubting."

   6. "The third said, I have married a wife." This is the pleasure of the
   flesh, which is a hindrance to many: and I would that it were so only
   without, and not within! There are men who say, "There is no happiness
   for a man, if he have not the pleasures of the flesh." These are they
   whom the Apostle censures, saying, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow
   we shall die.' [3486] Who hath risen to this life from the other? Who
   hath ever told us what goes on there? We take away with us, what in the
   time present makes our happiness." He that speaks thus, "has married a
   wife," attaches himself to the flesh, places his delight in the
   pleasures of the flesh, excuses himself from the supper; let him look
   well to it that he die not by an inward famine. Attend to John, the
   holy Apostle and Evangelist; "Love not the world, neither the things
   that are in the world." [3487] O ye who come to the Supper of the Lord,
   "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world." He did
   not say, "Have not;" but, "Love not." Thou hast had, possessed, loved.
   The love of earthly things, is the bird-lime of the spirit's wings. Lo,
   thou hast desired, thou hast stuck fast. "Who will give thee wings as
   of a dove?" [3488] When wilt thou fly, whither thou mayest in deed,
   seeing thou hast perversely wished to rest here, where thou hast to thy
   hurt stuck fast? "Love not the world," is the divine trumpet. By the
   voice of this trumpet unceasingly is it proclaimed to the compass of
   the earth, and to the whole world, "Love not the world, neither the
   things that are in the world. Whosoever loveth the world, the love of
   the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, is the lust of
   the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the ambition of life." [3489]
   He begins at the last with which the Gospel ends. He begins at that, at
   which the Gospel made an end. "The lust of the flesh, I have married a
   wife. The lust of the eyes, I have bought five pairs of oxen. The
   ambition of life, I have bought a farm."

   7. Now these senses are denoted by the mention of the eyes only, the
   whole by a part, because the pre-eminence in the five senses belongs to
   the eyes. Wherefore though sight belongs peculiarly to the eyes, we are
   accustomed to use the word "seeing" through all the five senses. How?
   In the first place, in relation to the eyes themselves we say; "See how
   white it is, look and see how white it is:" this has relation to the
   eyes. Hear and see how musical it is! Could we say conversely, "Hear
   and see how white it is"? This expression, "see," runs through all the
   senses; whereas the distinguishing expression [3490] of the other
   senses does not in its turn run through it. "Mark and see how musical;
   smell and see how agreeable it is; taste and see how sweet it is; touch
   and see how soft it is." And yet surely since they are senses, we
   should rather say thus; "Hear and be sensible how musical it is; smell
   and be sensible how agreeable it is; taste and be sensible how sweet it
   is; touch and be sensible how hot it is; handle and be sensible how
   smooth it is; handle and be sensible how soft it is." But we say none
   of these. For thus the Lord Himself after His resurrection when He
   appeared to His disciples, and when though they saw Him they still
   wavered in faith supposing that they saw a spirit, said, "Why do ye
   doubt, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? See My Hands and My
   Feet." It is not enough to say, "See;" He saith, "Touch, and handle,
   and see." [3491] "Look and see, handle and see; with the eyes alone
   see, and see by all the senses." Because He was looking for the inner
   sense of faith, He offered Himself to the outward senses of the body.
   We have made no attainment [3492] in the Lord by these outward senses,
   we have heard with our ears, have believed with our heart; and this
   hearing not from His mouth, but from the mouth of His preachers, from
   their mouths who were already at the supper, and who by the pouring
   forth of what they there drunk in invited us.

   8. Let us away then with vain and evil excuses, and come we to the
   supper by which we may be made fat within. Let not the puffing up of
   pride keep us back, let it not lift us up, nor unlawful curiosity scare
   us, and turn us away from God; let not the pleasure of the flesh hinder
   us from the pleasure of the heart. Let us come, and be filled. And who
   came but the beggars, the "maimed," the "halt," the "blind"? But there
   came not thither the rich, and the whole, who walked, as they thought,
   well, and saw acutely; who had great confidence in themselves, and were
   therefore in the more desperate case, in proportion as they were more
   proud. Let the beggars come, for He inviteth them, "who, though He was
   rich, for our sakes became poor, that we beggars through His poverty
   might be enriched." [3493] Let the maimed come, "for they that are
   whole need not a physician, but they that are in evil case." [3494] Let
   the halt come who may say to Him, "Set in order my steps in Thy paths."
   [3495] Let the blind come who may say, "Enlighten mine eyes, that I may
   never sleep in death." [3496] Such as these came at the hour, when
   those who had been first invited, had been rejected for their own
   excuses: they came at the hour, they entered in from the streets and
   lanes of the city. And the servant "who had been sent," brought answer,
   "Lord, it is done as Thou hast commanded, and yet there is room." "Go
   out," saith He, "into the highways and hedges, and compel those whom
   thou shalt find to come in." [3497] Whom thou shalt find wait not till
   they choose to come, compel them to come in. I have prepared a great
   supper, a great house, I cannot suffer any place to be vacant in it.
   The Gentiles came from the streets and lanes: let the heretics come
   from the hedges, here they shall find peace. For those who make hedges,
   their object is to make divisions. Let them be drawn away from the
   hedges, let them be plucked up from among the thorns. They have stuck
   fast in the hedges, they are unwilling to be compelled. [3498] Let us
   come in, they say, of our own good will. This is not the Lord's order,
   "Compel them," saith he, "to come in." Let compulsion be found outside,
   the will arise within.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3472] See Serm. xl. (xc. Ben.).

   [3473] Ps. lxxx. 7.

   [3474] Luke xiv. 16.

   [3475] 1 Tim. ii. 5.

   [3476] Villam, Vulgate.

   [3477] Luke xiv. 18-20.

   [3478] John xx. 25.

   [3479] John xx. 29.

   [3480] Temporalem.

   [3481] John xii. 3.

   [3482] 1 Cor. xi. 29.

   [3483] Luke xiv. 15.

   [3484] John vi. 51.

   [3485] John xx. 27.

   [3486] 1 Cor. xv. 32.

   [3487] 1 John ii. 15.

   [3488] Ps. liv. 7, Sept. (lv. 6, English version).

   [3489] 1 John ii. 15, 16, Vulgate.

   [3490] Proprietas.

   [3491] Luke xxiv. 38, 39.

   [3492] Carpsimus.

   [3493] 2 Cor. viii. 9.

   [3494] Matt. ix. 12, Vulgate.

   [3495] Ps. xvii. 5.

   [3496] Ps. xiii. 3.

   [3497] Luke xiv. 22, 23.

   [3498] This alludes to the laws made against the Donatists by the
   Christian Emperors. See St. Augustin's Epis. 195, and especially § 24.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXIII.

   [CXIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xvi. 9, "Make to yourselves friends by
   means of the mammon of unrighteousness," etc.

   1. Our duty is to give to others the admonitions we have received
   ourselves. The recent lesson of the Gospel has admonished us to make
   friends of the mammon of iniquity, that they too may "receive" those
   who do so "into everlasting habitations." But who are they that shall
   have everlasting habitations, but the Saints of God? And who are they
   who are to be received by them into everlasting habitations, but they
   who serve their need, and minister cheerfully to their necessities?
   Accordingly let us remember, that in the last judgment the Lord will
   say to those who shall stand on His right hand, "I was an hungred, and
   ye gave Me meat;" and the rest which ye know. And upon their enquiring
   when they had afforded these good offices to Him, He answered, "When ye
   did it to one of the least of Mine, ye did it unto Me." [3499] These
   least are they who receive into everlasting habitations. This He said
   to them on the right hand, because they did so: and the contrary He
   said to them on the left, because they would not. But what have they on
   the right hand who did so, received, or rather, what are they to
   receive? "Come," says He, "ye blessed of My Father, possess the kingdom
   prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an
   hungred, and ye gave Me meat. When ye did it to one of the least of
   Mine, ye did it unto Me." [3500] Who then are these least ones of
   Christ? They are those who have left all they had, and followed Him,
   and have distributed whatever they had to the poor; that unencumbered
   and without any worldly fetter they might serve God, and might lift
   their shoulders free from the burdens of the world, and winged as it
   were aloft. These are the least. And why the least? Because lowly,
   because not puffed up, not proud. Yet weigh them in the scales, these
   least ones, and thou wilt find them a heavy weight.

   2. But what means it, that He says they are "friends of the mammon of
   iniquity"? What is "the mammon of iniquity"? First, what is "mammon"?
   For it is not a Latin word. It is a Hebrew word, and cognate to the
   Punic language. For these languages are allied to one another by a kind
   of nearness of signification. What the Punics call mammon, is called in
   Latin, "lucre." [3501] What the Hebrews call mammon, is called in
   Latin, "riches." That we may express the whole then in Latin, our Lord
   Jesus Christ says this, "Make to yourselves friends of the riches of
   iniquity." Some, by a bad understanding of this, plunder the goods of
   others, and bestow some of that upon the poor, and so think that they
   do what is enjoined them. For they say, "To plunder the goods of
   others, is the mammon of iniquity; to spend some of it, especially on
   the poor saints, this is to make friends with the mammon of iniquity.
   This understanding of it must be corrected, yea, must be utterly
   effaced from the tablets of your heart. I would not that ye should so
   understand it. Give alms of your righteous labours: give out of that
   which ye possess rightfully. For ye cannot corrupt Christ your Judge,
   that He should not hear you together with the poor, from whom ye take
   away. For if thou wert to despoil any one who was weak, thyself being
   stronger and of greater power, and he were to come with thee to the
   judge, any man you please on this earth, who had any power of judging,
   and he were to wish to plead his cause with thee; if thou wert to give
   anything of the spoil and plunder of that poor man to the judge, that
   he might pronounce judgment in thy favour; would that judge please even
   thee? True, he has pronounced judgment in thy favour, and yet so great
   is the force of justice, that he would displease even thee. Do not then
   represent God to thyself as such an one as this. Do not set up such an
   idol in the temple of thine heart. Thy God is not such as thou oughtest
   not to be thyself. If thou wouldest not judge so, but wouldest judge
   justly; even so thy God is better than thou: He is not inferior to
   thee: He is more just, He is the fountain of justice. Whatsoever good
   thou hast done, thou hast gotten from Him; and whatsoever good thou
   hast given vent to, [3502] thou hast drunk in from Him. Dost thou
   praise the vessel, because it hath something from Him, and blame the
   fountain? Do not give alms out of usury and increase. I am speaking to
   the faithful, am speaking to those to whom we distribute the body of
   Christ. Be in fear and amend yourselves: that I may not have hereafter
   to say, Thou doest so, and thou too doest so. Yet I trow, that if I
   should do so, ye ought not to be angry with me, but with yourselves,
   that ye may amend yourselves. For this is the meaning of the expression
   in the Psalm, "Be ye angry, and sin not." [3503] I would have you be
   angry, but only that ye may not sin. Now in order that ye may not sin,
   with whom ought ye to be angry but with yourselves? For what is a
   penitent man, but a man who is angry with himself? That he may obtain
   pardon, he exacts punishment from himself; and so with good right says
   to God, "Turn Thine eyes from my sins, for I acknowledge my sin."
   [3504] If thou acknowledgest it, then He will pardon it. Ye then who
   have done so wrongly, do so no more: it is not lawful.

   3. But if ye have done so already, and have such money in your
   possession, and have filled your coffers thereby, and were heaping up
   treasure by these means: what ye have comes of evil, now then add not
   evil to it, and make to yourselves friends of the mammon of iniquity.
   Had Zacchaeus what he had from good sources? [3505] Read and see. He
   was the chief of the publicans, that is, he was one to whom the public
   taxes were paid in: by this he had his wealth. He had oppressed many,
   had taken from many, and so had heaped much together. Christ entered
   into his house, and salvation came upon his house; for so said the Lord
   Himself, "This day is salvation come to this house." [3506] Now mark
   the method of this salvation. First he was longing to see the Lord,
   because he was little in stature: but when the crowd hindered him, he
   got up into a sycamore tree, and saw Him as He passed by. But Jesus saw
   him, and said, "Zacchaeus, come down, I must abide at thy house." Thou
   art hanging there, but I will not keep thee in suspense. I will not,
   that is, put thee off. Thou didst wish to see Me as I passed by, to-day
   shalt thou find Me dwelling at thy house. So the Lord went in unto him,
   and he, filled with joy, said, "The half of my goods I give to the
   poor." Lo, how swiftly he runs, who runs to make friends of the mammon
   of iniquity. And lest he should be held guilty on any other account, he
   said, "If I have taken anything from any man, I" will "restore
   fourfold." He inflicted sentence of condemnation on himself, that he
   might not incur damnation. So then, ye who have anything from evil
   sources, do good therewith. Ye who have not, wish not to acquire by
   evil means. Be thou good thyself, who doest good with what is evilly
   acquired: and when with this evil thou beginnest to do any good, do not
   remain evil thyself. Thy money is being converted to good, and dost
   thou thyself continue evil?

   4. There is indeed another way of understanding it; and I will not
   withhold it too. The mammon of iniquity is all the riches of this
   world, from whatever source they come. For howsoever they be heaped
   together, they are the mammon of iniquity, that is, the riches of
   iniquity. What is, "they are the riches of iniquity"? It is money which
   iniquity calls by the name of riches. For if we seek for the true
   riches, they are different from these. In these Job abounded, naked as
   he was, when he had a heart full to Godward, and poured out praises
   like most costly gems to his God, when he had lost all he had. [3507]
   And from what treasure did he this, if he had nothing? These then are
   the true riches. But the other sort are called riches by iniquity. Thou
   dost possess these riches. I blame it not: an inheritance has come to
   thee, thy father was rich, and he left it to thee. Or thou hast
   honestly acquired them: thou hast a house full of the fruit of just
   labour; I blame it not. Yet even thus do not call them riches. For if
   thou dost call them riches, thou wilt love them: and if thou love them,
   thou wilt perish with them. Lose, that thou be not lost: give, that
   thou mayest gain: sow, that thou mayest reap. Call not these riches,
   for "the true" they are not. They are full of poverty, and liable ever
   to accidents. What sort of riches are those, for whose sake thou art
   afraid of the robber, for whose sake thou art afraid of thine own
   servant, lest he should kill thee, and take them away, and fly? If they
   were true riches, they would give thee security.

   5. So then those are the true riches, which when we have them, we
   cannot lose. And lest haply thou shouldest fear a thief because of
   them, they will be there where none can take them away. Hear thy Lord,
   "Lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where no thief
   approacheth." [3508] Then will they be riches, when thou hast removed
   them hence. As long as they are in the earth, they are not riches. But
   the world calls them riches, iniquity calls them so. God calls them
   therefore the mammon of iniquity, because iniquity calls them riches.
   Hear the Psalm, "O Lord, deliver me out of the hand of strange
   children, whose mouth hath spoken vanity, and their right hand is a
   right hand of iniquity. Whose sons are as new plants, firmly rooted
   from their youth. Their daughters decked out, adorned round about after
   the similitude of a temple. Their storehouses full, flowing out from
   this into that. Their oxen fat, their sheep fruitful, multiplying in
   their goings forth. There is no breach of wall, nor going forth, no
   crying out in their streets." [3509] Lo, what sort of happiness the
   Psalmist has described: but hear what is the case with them whom he has
   set forth as children of iniquity. "Whose mouth hath spoken vanity, and
   their right hand is a right hand of iniquity." Thus has he set them
   forth, and said that their happiness is only upon the earth. And what
   did he add? "They are happy the people that hath these things." But who
   called them so? "Strange children," aliens from the race, and belonging
   not to the seed of Abraham: they "called the people happy that hath
   these things." Who called them so? "They whose mouth hath spoken
   vanity." It is a vain thing then to call them happy who have these
   things. And yet they are called so by them, "whose mouth hath spoken
   vanity." By them the "mammon of iniquity" of the Gospel is called
   riches.

   6. But what sayest thou? Seeing that these "strange children" that they
   "whose mouth hath spoken vanity," have "called the people happy that
   hath these things," what sayest thou? These are false riches, show me
   the true. Thou findest fault with these, show me what thou praisest.
   Thou wishest me to despise these, show me what to prefer. Let the
   Psalmist speak himself. For he who said, "they called the people happy
   that hath these things," gives us such an answer, as if we had said to
   him, that is, to the Psalmist [3510] himself, "Lo, this thou hast taken
   away from us, and nothing hast thou given us: lo, these, lo, these we
   despise; whereby shall we live, whereby shall we be happy? For they who
   have spoken, they will undertake to answer [3511] for themselves. For
   they have called' men who have' riches happy.' But what sayest thou?"
   As if he had been thus questioned, he makes answer and says, They call
   the rich happy: but I say, "Happy are the people whose is the Lord
   their God." Thus then thou hast heard of the true riches, make friends
   of the mammon of iniquity, and thou shalt be "a happy people, whose is
   the Lord their God." At times we go along the way, and see very
   pleasant and productive estates, and we say, "Whose estate is that?" We
   are told, "such a man's;" and we say, "Happy man!" We "speak vanity."
   Happy he whose is that house, happy he whose that estate, happy he
   whose that flock, happy he whose that servant, happy he whose is that
   household. Take away vanity if Thou wouldest hear the truth. "Happy he
   whose is the Lord" his "God." For not he who has that estate is happy:
   but he whose is that "God." But in order to declare most plainly the
   happiness of possessions, thou sayest that thy estate has made thee
   happy. And why? Because thou livest by it. For when thou dost highly
   praise thine estate, thou sayest thus, "It finds me food, I live by
   it." Consider whereby thou dost really live. He by whom thou livest, is
   He to whom thou sayest, "With Thee is the fountain of life." [3512]
   "Happy is the people whose God is the Lord." O Lord my God, O Lord our
   God, make us happy by Thee, that we may come unto Thee. We wish not to
   be happy from gold, or silver, or land, from these earthly, and most
   vain, and transitory goods of this perishable life. Let not "our mouth
   speak vanity." Make us happy by Thee, seeing that we shall never lose
   Thee. When we shall once have gotten Thee, we shall neither lose Thee,
   nor be lost ourselves. Make us happy by Thee, because "Happy is the
   people whose is the Lord their God." Nor will God be angry if we shall
   say of Him, He is our estate. For we read that "the Lord is the portion
   of my inheritance." [3513] Grand thing, Brethren, we are both His
   inheritance, and He is ours, seeing that we both cultivate His service
   [3514] and He cultivateth us. [3515] It is no derogation [3516] to His
   honour that He cultivateth us. Because if we cultivate Him as our God,
   He cultivateth us as His field. And, (that ye may know that He doth
   cultivate us) hear Him whom He hath sent to us: "I," saith He, "am the
   vine, ye are the branches, My Father is the Husbandman." [3517]
   Therefore He doth cultivate us. But if we yield fruit, He prepares for
   us His garner. But if under the attention of so great a hand we will be
   barren, and for good fruit [3518] bring forth thorns, I am loth to say
   what follows. [3519] Let us make an end with a theme of joy. "Let us
   turn then to the Lord," etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3499] Matt. xxv. 35, etc.

   [3500] Matt. xxv. 40.

   [3501] Lucrum.

   [3502] Eructuasti.

   [3503] Ps. iv. 4, Sept.

   [3504] Ps. li. 9.

   [3505] Luke xix. 2, etc.

   [3506] Luke xix. 9.

   [3507] Job i. 21.

   [3508] Matt. vi. 20; Luke xii. 33.

   [3509] Ps. cxliv. 11, etc., Sept.

   [3510] Psalmo.

   [3511] Recipient.

   [3512] Ps. xxxvi. 9.

   [3513] Ps. xvi. 5.

   [3514] Colimus.

   [3515] Colit. Quia et colimus eum, et colit nos. Vide Serm. xlvii.,
   xxix., xxvii., ii.; Conf. B. xiii. 1.

   [3516] Injuria.

   [3517] John xv. 1.

   [3518] Frumento.

   [3519] See John xv. 2 and 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXIV.

   [CXIV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xvii. 3, "If thy brother sin, rebuke
   him," etc., touching the remission of sins.

   Delivered at the Table of St. Cyprian, in the presence of Count
   Boniface.

   1. The Holy Gospel which we heard just now as it was being read, has
   admonished touching the remission of sins. And on this subject must ye
   be admonished now by my discourse. For we are ministers of the word,
   not our own word, but the word of our God and Lord, whom no one serves
   without glory, whom no one despises without punishment. He then the
   Lord our God, who abiding with the Father made us, and having been made
   for us, re-made us, He the Lord our God Jesus Christ Himself says to us
   what we have heard just now in the Gospel. "If," He saith, "thy brother
   shall sin against thee, rebuke him, and if he shall repent, forgive
   him; and if he shall sin against time seven times in a day, and shall
   come and say, I repent, forgive him." [3520] He would not have "seven
   times in a day" otherwise understood than "as often as may be," lest
   haply he sin eight times, and thou be unwilling to forgive. What then
   is "seven times"? Always, as often as he shall sin and repent. For
   this, "Seven times in a day will I praise thee," [3521] is the same as
   in another Psalm, "His praise shall always be in my mouth." [3522] And
   there is the strongest reason why seven times should be put for that
   which is always: for the whole course of time revolves in a circle of
   seven coming and returning days.

   2. Whosoever then thou art that hast thy thoughts on Christ, and
   desirest to receive what He hath promised, be not slow to do that which
   He hath enjoined. Now what hath He promised? "Eternal life." And what
   hath He enjoined? That pardon be given to thy brother. As if He had
   said to thee, "Do thou, O man, give pardon to a man, that I, who am
   God, may come unto thee." But that I may pass over, or rather pass by
   for a while, those more exalted divine promises in which our Creator
   engages to make us equal with His Angels, that we may with Him, and in
   Him, and by Him, live without end; not to speak of this just now, dost
   thou not wish to receive of thy God this very thing, which thou art
   commanded to give thy brother? This very thing, I say, which thou art
   commanded to give thy brother, dost thou not wish to receive from thy
   Lord? Tell me if thou wishest it not; and so give it not. What is this,
   but that thou shouldest forgive him that asks thee, if thou require to
   be forgiven? But if thou have nothing to be forgiven thee, I dare to
   say, be unwilling to forgive. Though I ought not even to say this.
   Though thou have nothing to be forgiven thee, forgive.

   3. Thou art just on the point of saying to me, "But I am not God, I am
   a man, a sinner." God be thanked that thou dost confess thou hast sins.
   Forgive then, that they may be forgiven thee. Yet the Lord Himself our
   God exhorteth us to imitate Him. In the first place God Himself,
   Christ, exhorteth us, of whom the Apostle Peter said, "Christ hath
   suffered for us, leaving you an example that ye should follow His
   steps, who did no sin, neither was guile, found in His mouth." [3523]
   He then verily had no sin, yet did He die for our sins, and shed His
   Blood for the remission of sins. He took upon Him for our sakes what
   was not His due, that He might deliver us from what was due to us.
   Death was not due to Him, nor life to us. Why? Because we were sinners.
   Death was not due to Him, nor life to us; He received what was not due
   to Him, He gave what was not due to us. But since we are speaking of
   the remission of sins, lest ye should think it too high a thing to
   imitate Christ, hear the Apostle saying, "Forgiving one another, even
   as God in Christ hath forgiven you." [3524] "Be ye therefore imitators
   of God." They are the Apostle's words, not mine. Is it indeed a proud
   thing to imitate God? Hear the Apostle, "Be ye imitators of God as
   dearly beloved children." [3525] Thou art called a child: if thou
   refuse to imitate Him, why seekest thou His inheritance?

   4. This would I say even if thou hadst no sin which thou mightest
   desire to be forgiven thee. But as it is, whosoever thou art, thou art
   a man; though thou be righteous, thou art a man; be thou layman, or
   monk, or clerk, or Bishop, or Apostle, thou art a man. Hear the
   Apostle's voice, "If we shall say that we have no sin, we deceive
   ourselves." [3526] He, that famous John and an Evangelist, he whom the
   Lord Christ loved beyond all the rest, who lay on His breast, he says,
   "If we shall say." He did not say, "If ye shall say that ye have no
   sin," but "if we shall say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves,
   and the truth is not in us." He joined himself in the guilt, that he
   might be joined in the pardon also. "If we shall say." Consider who it
   is that says, "If we shall say that we have no sin, we deceive
   ourselves, and the truth is not in us. But if we shall confess our
   sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
   from all iniquity." [3527] How does He cleanse? By forgiving, not as
   though He found nothing to punish, but as finding something to forgive.
   So then, Brethren, if we have sins, let us forgive them that ask us.
   Let us not retain enmities in our heart against another. For the
   retaining of enmities more than anything corrupts this heart of ours.

   5. I would then that thou shouldest forgive, seeing that I find thee
   asking forgiveness. Thou art asked, forgive: thou art asked, and thou
   wilt ask thyself; thou art asked, forgive; thou wilt ask to be
   forgiven; for, lo, the time of prayer will come: I have thee fast in
   the words thou wilt have to speak. Thou wilt say, "Our Father, which
   art in heaven." For thou wilt not be in the number of children, if thou
   shalt not say, "Our Father." So then thou wilt say, "Our Father, which
   art in heaven." Follow on; "Hallowed be Thy Name." Say on, "Thy kingdom
   come." Follow still on, "Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth."
   See what thou addest next, "Give us this day our daily bread." [3528]
   Where are thy riches? So thou art a beggar. Nevertheless in the mean
   while (it is the point I am speaking of), say what is next after, "Give
   us this day our daily bread." Say what follows this: "Forgive us our
   debts." Now thou hast come to my words, "Forgive us our debts." By what
   right? by what covenant? on what condition? on what express
   stipulation? "As we also forgive our debtors." It is but a small thing
   that thou dost not forgive; yea thou dost more, thou liest unto God.
   The condition is laid down, the law fixed. "Forgive as I forgive."
   Therefore He does not forgive, unless thou forgivest. "Forgive as I
   forgive." Thou wishest to be forgiven when thou askest, forgive him
   that asks of thee. He that is skilled in heaven's laws [3529] has
   dictated these prayers: He does not deceive thee; ask according to the
   tenor of His heavenly voice: say, "Forgive us, as we also forgive," and
   do what thou sayest. He that lies in his prayers, loses the benefit he
   seeks: he that lies in his prayers, both loses his cause, and finds his
   punishment. And if any one lies to the emperor, he is convicted of his
   lie at his coming: but when thou liest in prayer, thou by thy very
   prayer art convicted. For God does not seek for witness as regards thee
   to convict thee. He who dictated the prayers to thee, is thine
   Advocate: if thou liest, He is a witness against thee: if thou dost not
   amend thyself, He will be thy Judge. So then both say it, and do. For
   if thou say it not, thou wilt not obtain making thy requests contrary
   to the law; but if thou say it and do it not, thou wilt be further
   guilty of lying. There is no means of evading that verse, save by
   fulfilling what we say. Can we blot this verse out of our prayer? Would
   ye that clause, "Forgive us our debts," should be there, and that we
   should blot out what follows, "As we also forgive our debtors"? Thou
   shalt not blot it out, lest thou be first blotted out thyself. So then
   in this prayer thou sayest, "Give," and thou sayest, "Forgive:" that
   thou mayest receive what thou hast not, and may be forgiven what thou
   hast done amiss. So then thou wishest to receive, give; thou wishest to
   be forgiven, forgive. It is a brief summary. Hear Christ Himself in
   another place, "Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven." What will ye
   forgive? What others have sinned against you. What shall ye be
   forgiven? What ye have sinned yourselves. "Forgive." "Give, and there
   shall be given you what ye desire," [3530] eternal life. Support the
   temporal life of the poor man, sustain the poor man's present life, and
   for this so small and earthly seed ye shall receive for harvest life
   eternal. Amen.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3520] Luke xvii. 4.

   [3521] Ps. cxix. 164.

   [3522] Ps. xxxiv. 1.

   [3523] 1 Pet. ii. 21, 22.

   [3524] Col. iii. 13; Eph. iv. 32.

   [3525] Eph. v. 1.

   [3526] 1 John i. 8.

   [3527] 1 John i. 9.

   [3528] Matt. vi. 9, etc.

   [3529] Jurisperitus.

   [3530] Luke vi. 37, 38.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXV.

   [CXV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xviii. 1,"They ought always to pray,
   and not to faint," etc. And on the two who went up into the temple to
   pray: and of the little children who were presented unto Christ.

   1. The lesson of the Holy Gospel builds us up unto the duty of praying
   and believing, and of not putting our trust in ourselves, but in the
   Lord. What greater encouragement to prayer than the parable which is
   proposed to us of the unjust judge? For an unjust judge, who feared not
   God, nor regarded man, yet gave ear to a widow who besought him,
   overcome by her importunity, not inclined thereto by kindness. [3531]
   If he then heard her prayer, who hated to be asked, how must He hear
   who exhorts us to ask? When therefore by this comparison from a
   contrary case the Lord had taught that "men ought always to pray and
   not to faint," [3532] He added and said, "Nevertheless, when the Son of
   Man shall come, thinkest thou that He shall find faith on the earth?"
   [3533] If faith fail, prayer perishes. For who prays for that which he
   does not believe? Whence also the blessed Apostle, when he exhorted to
   prayer, said, "Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be
   saved." [3534] And in order to show that faith is the fountain of
   prayer, he went on and said, "How then shall they call on Him in whom
   they have not believed?" [3535] So then that we may pray, let us
   believe; and that this same faith whereby we pray fail not, let us
   pray. Faith pours out prayer, and the pouring out of prayer obtains the
   strengthening of faith. Faith, I say, pours out prayer, the pouring out
   of prayer obtains strengthening even for faith itself. For that faith
   might not fail in temptations, therefore did the Lord say," Watch and
   pray, lest ye enter into temptation." [3536] "Watch," He saith, "and
   pray, lest ye enter into temptation." What is to "enter into
   temptation," but to depart from faith? For so far temptation advances
   as faith gives way: and so far temptation gives way, as faith advances.
   For that you may know, Beloved, more plainly, that the Lord said,
   "Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation," as touching faith lest
   it should fail and perish; He said in the same place of the Gospel,
   "This night hath Satan desired to sift [3537] you as wheat, and I have
   prayed for thee, Peter, that thy faith fail not." [3538] He that
   defendeth prayeth, and shall not he pray who is in peril? For in the
   words of the Lord, "when the Son of Man shall come, thinkest thou that
   He shall find faith on the earth?" He spoke of that faith, which is
   perfect. For it is scarce found on the earth. Lo! this Church of God is
   full: and who would come hither, if there were no faith? But who would
   not remove mountains, if there were full faith? Look at the very
   Apostles: they would not have left all they had, have trodden under
   foot this world's hope, and followed the Lord, if they had not had
   great faith; and yet if they had full faith, they would not have said
   to the Lord, "Increase our faith." [3539] See again, that man
   confessing both of himself (behold faith, yet not full faith), who when
   he had presented to the Lord his son to be cured of an evil spirit, and
   was asked whether he believed, answered and said, "Lord, I believe,
   help Thou mine unbelief." [3540] "Lord," says he, "I believe," I
   believe; therefore there was faith. But "help Thou mine unbelief,"
   therefore there was not full faith.

   2. But inasmuch as faith belongs not to the proud, but to the humble,
   "He spake this parable unto certain who seemed to themselves to be
   righteous, and despised others. Two men went up into the temple to
   pray, the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The Pharisee said,
   God, I thank Thee that I am not as the rest of men." [3541] He might at
   least have said, "as many men." What does, "as the rest of men," mean,
   but all except himself? "I," he says, "am just, the rest are sinners."
   "I am not as the rest of men, unjust, extortioners, adulterers." And,
   lo, from thy neighbour, the publican, thou takest occasion of greater
   pride. "As," he says, "this publican." "I," he says, "am alone, he is
   of the rest." "I am not," says he, "such as he is, through my righteous
   deeds, whereby I have no unrighteousness." "I fast twice in the week, I
   give tithes of all that I possess." [3542] In all his words seek out
   for any one thing that he asked of God, and thou wilt find nothing. He
   went up to pray: he had no mind to pray to God, but to laud himself.
   Nay, it is but a small part of it, that he prayed not to God, but
   lauded himself. More than this he even mocked him that did pray. "But
   the Publican stood afar off;" [3543] and yet he was in deed near to
   God. The consciousness of his heart kept him off, piety brought him
   close. "But the Publican stood afar off:" yet the Lord regarded him
   near. "For the Lord is high, yet hath He respect unto the lowly."
   [3544] But "those that are high" as was this Pharisee, "He knoweth afar
   off." "The high" indeed "God knoweth afar off," but He doth not pardon
   them. Hear still more the humility of the Publican. It is but a small
   matter that he stood afar off; "he did not even lift up his eyes unto
   heaven." He looked not, that he might be looked upon. He did not dare
   to look upwards, his conscience pressed him down: but hope lifted him
   up. Hear again, "he smote his breast." He punished himself: wherefore
   the Lord spared him for his confession. "He smote his breast, saying,
   Lord, be merciful to me a sinner." See who he is that prays. Why dost
   thou marvel that God should pardon, when he acknowledges his own sin?
   Thus thou hast heard the case [3545] of the Pharisee and Publican; now
   hear the sentence; thou hast heard the proud accuser, thou hast heard
   the humble criminal; hear now the Judge. "Verily I say unto you." The
   Truth saith, God saith, the Judge saith it. "Verily I say unto you,
   That Publican went down from the temple justified rather than that
   Pharisee." [3546] Tell us, Lord, the cause. Lo! I see that the publican
   goes down from the temple justified rather than the Pharisee. I ask
   why? Dost thou ask why? Hear why. "Because every one that exalteth
   himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be
   exalted." [3547] Thou hast heard the sentence, beware of its evil
   cause. In other words, thou hast heard the sentence, beware of pride.

   3. Let now those ungodly babblers, whosoever they be, who presume on
   their own strength, let them hear and see these things: let them hear
   who say, God made me a man, I make myself just. O thou who art worse
   and more detestable than the Pharisee! The Pharisee in the Gospel did
   indeed call himself just, but yet he gave thanks to God for it. He
   called himself just, but yet he gave God thanks. "I thank Thee, O God,
   that I am not as the rest of men." "I thank Thee, O God." He gives God
   thanks, that he is not as the rest of men: and yet he is blamed as
   being proud and puffed up; not in that he gave God thanks, but in that
   he desired as it were no more to be added unto him. "I thank thee that
   I am not as the rest of men, unjust." So then thou art just; so then
   thou askest for nothing; so then thou art full already; so then the
   life of man is not a trial upon earth; [3548] so then thou art full
   already; so then thou aboundest already, so then thou hast no ground
   for saying, "Forgive us our debts!" What must his case be then who
   impiously impugns grace, if he is blamed who give thanks proudly?

   4. And, lo, after the case had been stated, and the sentence
   pronounced, little children also came forth, yea, rather, are carried
   and presented to be touched. To be touched by whom, but the Physician?
   Surely, it will be said, they must be whole. To whom are the infants
   presented to be touched? To whom? To the Saviour. If to the Saviour,
   they are brought to be saved. To whom, but to Him "who came to seek and
   to save what was lost." [3549] How were they lost? As far as concerns
   them personally, I see that they are without fault, I am seeking for
   their guiltiness. Whence is it? I listen to the Apostle, "By one man
   sin entered into the world. By one man," he says, "sin entered into the
   world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men by him in
   whom all sinned." [3550] Let then the little children come, let them
   come: let the Lord be heard. "Suffer little children to come unto Me."
   [3551] Let the little ones come, let the sick come to the Physician,
   the lost to their Redeemer: let them come, let no man hinder them. In
   the branch they have not yet committed any evil, but they are ruined in
   their root. "Let the Lord bless the small with the great." [3552] Let
   the Physician touch both small and great. The cause of the little ones
   we commend to their elders. Speak ye for them who are mute, pray for
   them who weep. If ye are not their elders to no purpose, be ye their
   guardians: defend them who are not able yet to manage their own cause.
   Common is the loss, let the finding be common: we were lost all
   together, together be we found in Christ. Uneven is the desert, but
   common is the grace. They have no evil but what they have drawn from
   the source: they have no evil but what they have derived from the first
   original. Let not them keep them off from salvation, who to what they
   have so derived have added much more evil. The elder in age is the
   elder in iniquity too. But the grace of God effaces what thou hast
   derived, effaces too what thou hast added. For, "where sin abounded,
   grace hath superabounded." [3553]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3531] Pietate.

   [3532] Luke xviii. 1.

   [3533] Luke xviii. 8, Vulgate.

   [3534] Rom. x. 13.

   [3535] Rom. x. 14.

   [3536] Luke xxii. 46.

   [3537] Vexare.

   [3538] Luke xxii. 31, 32.

   [3539] Luke xvii. 5.

   [3540] Mark ix. 24.

   [3541] Luke xviii. 9-11.

   [3542] Luke xviii. 12.

   [3543] Luke xviii. 13.

   [3544] Ps. cxxxviii. 6.

   [3545] Controversiam.

   [3546] Luke xviii. 14.

   [3547] Luke xviii. 14.

   [3548] Job vii. 1, Sept.

   [3549] Luke xix. 10.

   [3550] Rom. v. 12.

   [3551] Luke xviii. 16.

   [3552] Ps. cxv. 13.

   [3553] Rom. v. 20.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXVI.

   [CXVI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, Luke xxiv. 36, "He himself stood in the
   midst of them, and saith unto them, peace be unto you," etc.

   1. The Lord appeared to His disciples after His resurrection, as ye
   have heard, and saluted them, saying, "Peace be unto you." [3554] This
   is peace indeed, and the salutation of salvation: for the very word
   salutation has received its name from salvation. [3555] And what can be
   better than that Salvation Itself should salute man? For Christ is our
   Salvation. He is our Salvation, who was wounded for us, and fixed by
   nails to the tree, and being taken down from the tree, was laid in the
   sepulchre. And from the sepulchre He arose, with His wounds healed, His
   scars kept. For this He judged expedient for His disciples, that His
   scars should be kept, where by the wounds of their hearts might be
   healed. What wounds? The wounds of unbelief. For He appeared to their
   eyes, exhibiting real flesh, and they thought they saw a spirit. It is
   no light wound, this wound of the heart. Yea, they have made a
   malignant heresy who have abided in this wound. But do we suppose that
   the disciples had not been wounded, because they were so quickly
   healed? Only, Beloved, suppose, if they had continued in this wound, to
   think that the Body which had been buried, could not rise again, but
   that a spirit in the image of a body, deceived the eyes of men: if they
   had continued in this belief, yea, rather in this unbelief, not their
   wounds, but their death would have had to be bewailed.

   2. But what said the Lord Jesus? "Why are ye troubled, and why do
   thoughts ascend into your hearts?" [3556] If thoughts ascend into your
   heart, the thoughts come from the earth. But it is good for a man, not
   that a thought should ascend into his heart, but that his heart should
   itself ascend upwards, where the Apostle would have believers place
   their hearts, to whom he said, "If ye be risen with Christ, mind those
   things which are above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of
   God. Seek those things which are above, not the things which are upon
   the earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.
   When Christ your life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him
   in glory." [3557] In what glory? The glory of the resurrection. In what
   glory? Hear the Apostle saying of this body, "It is sown in dishonour,
   it shall rise in glory." [3558] This glory the Apostles were unwilling
   to assign to their Master, their Christ, their Lord: they did not
   believe that His Body could rise from the sepulchre: they thought Him
   to be a Spirit, though they saw His flesh, and they believed not their
   very eyes. Yet we believe them who preach but do not show Him. Lo, they
   believed not Christ who showed Himself to them. Malignant wound! Let
   the remedies for these scars come forth. "Why are ye troubled, and why
   do thoughts ascend into your hearts? See My hands and My feet," where I
   was fixed with the nails. "Handle and see." But ye see, and yet do not
   see. "Handle and see." What? "That a spirit hath not flesh and bones,
   as ye see me have. When He had thus spoken," so it is written, "He
   showed them His hands and His feet." [3559]

   3. "And while they were yet in hesitation, and wondered for joy."
   [3560] Now there was joy already, and yet hesitation continued. For a
   thing incredible had taken place, yet taken place it had. Is it at this
   day a thing incredible, that the Body of the Lord rose again from the
   sepulchre? The whole cleansed world [3561] has believed it; whoso has
   not believed it, has remained in his uncleanness. Yet at that time it
   was incredible: and persuasion was addressed not to the eyes only, but
   to the hands also, that by the bodily senses faith might descend into
   their heart, and that faith so descending into their heart might be
   preached throughout the world to them who neither saw nor touched, and
   yet without doubting believed. "Have ye," saith He, "anything to eat?"
   How much doeth the good Builder still to build up the edifice of faith?
   He did not hunger, yet He asked to eat. And He ate by an act of His
   power, not through necessity. So then let the disciples acknowledge the
   verity of His body, which the world has acknowledged at their
   preaching.

   4. If haply there be any heretics who still in their hearts maintain
   that Christ exhibited Himself to sight, but that Christ's was not very
   flesh; let them now lay aside that error, and let the Gospel persuade
   them. We do but blame them for entertaining this conceit: He will damn
   them if they shall persevere in it. Who art thou who dost not believe
   that a body laid in the sepulchre could rise again? If thou art a
   Manichee, who dost not believe that He was crucified either, because
   thou dost not believe that He was even born, thou declarest that all
   that He showed was false. He showed what was false, and dost thou speak
   the truth? Thou dost not lie with thy mouth, and did He lie in His
   body? Lo thou dost suppose that He appeared unto the eyes of men what
   He really was not, that He was a spirit, not flesh. Hear Him: He loves
   thee, let Him not condemn thee. Hear Him speaking: lo, He speaks to
   thee, thou unhappy one, He speaks to thee, "Why art thou troubled, and
   why do thoughts ascend into thine heart?" "See," saith He, "My hands
   and My feet. Handle and see, because a spirit hath not flesh and bones
   as ye see Me have." This spake the Truth, and did He deceive? It was a
   body then, it was flesh; that which had been buried, appeared. Let
   doubting perish, and meet praise ensue.

   5. He showed himself then to the disciples. What is "Himself"? The Head
   of His Church. The Church was foreseen by Him as in thee to be
   throughout the world, by the disciples it was not yet seen. He showed
   the Head, He promised the Body. For what did He add next? "These are
   the words which I spake to you, while I was yet with you." [3562] What
   is this, "While I was yet with you"? Was He not with them then when He
   was speaking to them? What is, "when I was yet with you"? was with you
   as mortal, which now I am not. I was with you when I had yet to die.
   What is, "with you"? With you who were to die, Myself to die. Now I am
   no more with you: for I am with those who are to die, Myself to die no
   more for ever. This then is what I said to you. What? "That all things
   must be fulfilled which are written in the Law, and in the Prophets,
   and in the Psalms concerning Me." [3563] I told you that all things
   must be fulfilled. "Then opened He their understanding." [3564] Come
   then, O Lord, employ Thy keys, open, that we may understand. Lo, Thou
   dost tell all things, and yet are not believed. Thou art thought to be
   a spirit, art touched, art rudely handled, [3565] and yet they who
   touch Thee hesitate. Thou dost admonish them out of the Scriptures, and
   yet they understand Thee not. Their hearts are closed, open, and enter
   in. He did so. "Then opened He their understanding." Open, O Lord, yea,
   open the heart of him who is in doubt concerning Christ. Open "his"
   understanding who believes that Christ was a phantom. "Then opened He
   their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures."

   6. And "He said unto them." What? "That thus it behoved. That thus it
   is written, and thus it behoved." What? "That Christ should suffer, and
   rise from the dead the third day." [3566] And this they saw, they saw
   Him suffering, they saw Him hanging, they saw Him with them alive after
   His resurrection. What then did they not see? The Body, that is, the
   Church. Him they saw, her they saw not. They saw the Bridegroom, the
   Bride yet lay hid. Let him promise her too. "Thus it is written, and
   thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third
   day." This is the Bridegroom, what of the Bride? "And that repentance
   and remission of sins should be preached in His Name among all nations,
   beginning at Jerusalem." [3567] This the disciples did not yet see:
   they did not yet see the Church throughout all nations, beginning at
   Jerusalem. They saw the Head, and they believed the Head touching the
   Body. By this which they saw, they believed that which they saw not. We
   too are like to them: we see something which they saw not, and
   something we do not see which they did see. What do we see, which they
   saw not? The Church throughout all nations. What do we not see, which
   they saw? Christ present in the flesh. As they saw Him, and believed
   concerning the Body, so do we see the Body; let us believe concerning
   the Head. Let what we have respectively seen help us. The sight of
   Christ helped them to believe the future Church: the sight of the
   Church helps us to believe that Christ has risen. Their faith was made
   complete, and ours is made complete also. Their faith was made complete
   from the sight of the Head, ours is made complete by the sight of the
   Body. Christ was made known to them "wholly," and to us is He so made
   known: but He was not seen "wholly" by them, nor by us has He been
   "wholly" seen. By them the Head was seen, the Body believed. By us the
   Body has been seen, the Head believed. Yet to none is Christ lacking:
   in all He is complete, though to this day His Body remains imperfect.
   The Apostles believed; through them many of the inhabitants of
   Jerusalem believed; Judæa believed. Samaria believed. Let the members
   be added on, the building added on to the foundation. "For no other
   foundation can any man lay," says the Apostle, "than that which is
   laid, which is Christ Jesus." [3568] Let the Jews rage madly, and be
   filled with jealousy: Stephen be stoned, Saul keep the raiment of them
   who stone him, Saul, one day to be the Apostle Paul. [3569] Let Stephen
   be killed, the Church of Jerusalem dispersed in confusion: out of it go
   forth burning brands, and spread themselves and spread their flame. For
   in the Church of Jerusalem, as it were burning brands were set on fire
   by the Holy Spirit, when they had all one soul, and one heart to
   God-ward. [3570] When Stephen was stoned, that pile suffered
   persecution: the brands were dispersed, and the world was set on fire.

   7. And then intent on his furious schemes, that Saul received letters
   from the chief of the priests, and began his journey in his cruel rage,
   breathing out slaughter, thirsting for blood, to drag bound and to
   hurry off to punishment whomsoever he could, and from every quarter
   that he could, and to satiate himself with the shedding of their blood.
   But where was God, where was Christ, where He that had crowned Stephen?
   Where, but in heaven? Let Him now look on Saul, and mock him in his
   fury, and call from heaven, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?'
   [3571] I am in heaven, and thou in earth, and yet thou persecutest Me.
   Thou dost not touch the body, but my members thou art treading down.
   Yet what art thou doing? What art thou gaining? It is hard for thee to
   kick against the pricks.' Kick as thou wilt, thou only distressest
   thyself. Lay aside thy fury then, recover soundness. Lay aside evil
   counsel, seek after good succour." By that voice he was struck to the
   earth. Who was struck to the earth? The persecutor. Lo, by that one
   word was he overcome. After what wast thou going, after what was thy
   fury carrying thee? Those whom thou wast seeking out, now thou
   followest; whom thou wast persecuting, now for them thou sufferest
   persecution. He rises up the preacher, who was struck to the earth, the
   persecutor. He heard the Lord's voice. He was blinded, but in the body
   only, that he might be enlightened in heart. He was brought to Ananias,
   catechised on sundry points, baptized, and so came forth an Apostle.
   Speak then, preach, preach Christ, spread His doctrine, O thou goodly
   leader of the flock, [3572] but lately a wolf. See him, mark him, who
   once was raging. "But for me, God forbid that I should glory, save in
   the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world has been
   crucified to me and I to the world." [3573] Spread the Gospel: scatter
   with thy mouth what thou hast conceived in thine heart. Let the nations
   hear, let the nations believe; let the nations multiply, let the Lord's
   empurpled spouse spring forth from the blood of Martyrs. And from her
   how many have come already, how many members have cleaved to the Head,
   and cleave to Him still and believe! They were baptized, and others
   shall be baptized, and after them shall others come. Then I say, at the
   end of the world shall the stones be joined to the foundation, living
   stones, holy stones, that at the end the whole edifice may be built by
   that Church, yea by this very Church which now sings the new song,
   while the house is in building. For so the Psalm itself says, "When the
   house was in building after the captivity;" and what says it, "Sing
   unto the Lord a new song, sing unto the Lord all the earth." [3574] How
   great a house is this! But when does it sing the new song? When it is
   in building. When is it dedicated? At the end of the world. Its
   foundation has been already dedicated, because He hath ascended into
   heaven, and dieth no more. When we too shall have risen to die no more,
   then shall we be dedicated.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3554] Luke xxiv. 36.

   [3555] Salutatio a salute.

   [3556] Luke xxiv. 38.

   [3557] Col. iii. 1, etc.

   [3558] 1 Cor. xv. 43.

   [3559] Luke xxiv. 38-40.

   [3560] Luke xxiv. 41.

   [3561] Totus hoc credidit mundus, qui non credidit remansit immundus.

   [3562] Luke xxiv. 44.

   [3563] Luke xxiv. 44.

   [3564] Luke xxiv. 45.

   [3565] Ulsaris.

   [3566] Luke xxiv. 46.

   [3567] Luke xxiv. 47.

   [3568] 1 Cor. iii. 11.

   [3569] Acts vii. 58.

   [3570] Acts iv. 32.

   [3571] Acts ix. 4.

   [3572] Aries.

   [3573] Gal. vi. 14.

   [3574] Ps. xcv. 1, Sept. (xcvi. 1, English version).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXVII.

   [CXVII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John i. 1, "In the beginning was the word,
   and the word was with God, and the word was God," etc. Against the
   Arians.

   1. The section of the Gospel which has been read, most dearly beloved
   brethren, looketh for the pure eye of the heart. For from John's Gospel
   we have understood our Lord Jesus Christ according to His Divinity for
   the creating of the whole creation, and according to His Humanity for
   the recovery of the creature fallen. Now in this same Gospel we find
   what sort and how great a man was John, that from the dignity of the
   dispenser it may be understood of how great a price is the Word which
   could be announced by such a man; yea, rather how without price is That
   which surpasseth all things. For any purchasable thing is either equal
   to the price, or it is below it, or it exceeds it. When any one
   procures a thing for as much as it is worth, the price is equal to the
   thing which is procured; when for less, it is below it; when for more,
   it exceeds it. But to the Word of God nothing can either be equalled,
   or to exchange can anything be below It, or above It. For all things
   can be below the Word of God, for that "all things were made by Him;"
   [3575] yet are they not in such wise below, as if they were the price
   of the Word, that any one should give something to receive That. Yet if
   we may say so, and if any principle or custom of speaking admit this
   expression, the price for procuring the Word, is the procurer himself,
   who will have given himself for himself to This Word. Accordingly when
   we buy anything we look out for something to give, that for the price
   we give we may have the thing we wish to buy. And that which we give is
   without us; and if it was with us before, what we give becomes without
   us, that that which we procure may be with us. Whatever price the
   purchaser may find it, it must needs be such as that he gives what he
   has, and receives what he has not; yet so that he from whom the price
   goes himself remains, and that for which he gives the price is added to
   him. But whoso would procure this Word, whoso would have it, let him
   not seek for anything without himself to give, let him give himself.
   And when he shall have done this, he doth not lose himself, as he
   loseth the price when he buys anything.

   2. The Word of God then is set forth before all men; let them who can,
   procure It, and they can who have a godly will. For in That Word is
   peace; and "peace on earth is to men of good will." [3576] So then
   whoso will procure it, let him give himself. This is as it were the
   price of the Word, if so it may in any way be said, when he that giveth
   doth not lose himself, and gaineth the Word for which he giveth
   himself, and gaineth himself too in the Word to whom he giveth himself.
   And what giveth he to the Word? Not ought that is any other's than His,
   for whom he giveth himself; but what by the Same Word was made, that is
   given back to Him to be remade; "All things were made by Him." If all
   things, then of course man too. If the heaven, and earth, and sea, and
   all things that are therein, if the whole creation; of course more
   manifestly he, who being made after the image of God by the Word was
   made man.

   3. I am not now, brethren, discussing how the words, "In the beginning
   was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God," [3577]
   can be understood. After an ineffable sort it may be understood; it
   cannot by the words of man he made to be understood. I am treating of
   the Word of God, and telling you why It is not understood. I am not now
   speaking to make It understood, but I tell you what hinders It from
   being understood. For He is a certain Form, a Form not formed, but the
   Form of all things formed; a Form unchangeable, without failure,
   without decay, without thee, without place, surpassing all things,
   being in all things, as at once a kind of foundation in which they are,
   and a Head-stone under which they are. If you say that all things are
   in Him, you lie not. For This Word is called the Wisdom of God; and we
   have it written, "In Wisdom hast Thou made all things." [3578] Lo, then
   in Him are all things: and yet in that He is God, under Him are all
   things. I am showing how incomprehensible is what has been read; yet it
   has been read, not that it should be comprehended by man, but that man
   should sorrow that he comprehends it not, and find out whereby he is
   hindered from comprehending, and remove those hindrances, and, himself
   changed from worse to better, aspire after the perception of the
   unchangeable Word. For the Word doth not advance or increase by the
   addition of those who know It; but is Entire, if thou abide; Entire, if
   thou depart; Entire, when thou dost return; abiding in Itself, and
   renewing all things. It is then the Form of all things, the Form
   unfashioned, without thee, as I have said, and without space. For
   whatsoever is contained in space, is circumscribed. Every form is
   circumscribed by bounds; it hath limits wherefrom and whereunto it
   reaches. Again, what is contained in place, and has extension in a sort
   of bulk and space, is less in its parts than in the whole. God grant
   that ye may understand.

   4. Now from the bodies which are day by day before our eyes, which we
   see, which we touch, among which we live, we are able to judge how that
   every body hath a form in space. Now everything which occupies a
   certain space, is less in its parts than in its whole. The arm, for
   instance, is a part of the human body; of course the arm is less than
   the whole body. And if the arm be less, it occupies a smaller space. So
   again the head, in that it is a part of the body, is contained in less
   space, and is less than the whole body of which it is the head. So all
   things which are in space, are less in their several parts than in the
   whole. Let us entertain no such idea, no such thought concerning That
   Word. Let us not form our conceptions of spiritual things from the
   suggestion of the flesh. That Word, That God, is not less in part than
   in the whole.

   5. But thou art not able to conceive of any such thing. Such ignorance
   is more pious than presumptuous knowledge. For we are speaking of God.
   It is said, "And the Word was God." [3579] We are speaking of God; what
   marvel, if thou do not comprehend? For if thou comprehend, He is not
   God. Be there a pious confession of ignorance, rather than a rash
   profession of knowledge. To reach to God in any measure by the mind, is
   a great blessedness; but to comprehend Him, is altogether impossible.
   God is an object for the mind, He is to be understood; a body is for
   the eyes, it is to be seen. But thinkest thou that thou comprehendest a
   body by the eye? Thou canst not at all. For whatever thou lookest at,
   thou dost not see the whole. If thou seest a man's face, thou dost not
   see his back at the time thou seest the face; and when thou seest the
   back, thou dost not at that time see the face. Thou dost not then so
   see, as to comprehend; but when thou seest another part which thou
   hadst not seen before, unless memory aid thee to remember that thou
   hast seen that from which thou dost withdraw, thou couldest never say
   that thou hadst comprehended anything even on the surface. Thou
   handlest what thou seest, turnest it about on this side and that, or
   thyself dost go round it to see the whole. In one view then thou canst
   not see the whole. And as long as thou turnest it about to see it, thou
   art but seeing the parts; and by putting together that thou hast seen
   the other parts, thou dost fancy that thou seest the whole. But this
   must not be understood as the sight of the eyes, but the activity of
   the memory. What then can be said, Brethren, of that Word? Lo, of the
   bodies which are before our eyes we say they cannot comprehend them by
   a glance; what eye of the heart then comprehendeth God? Enough that it
   reach to Him if the eye be pure. But if it reach, it reacheth by a sort
   of incorporeal and spiritual touch, yet it doth not comprehend; and
   that, only if it be pure. And a man is made blessed by touching with
   the heart That which ever abideth Blessed; and that is this Very
   Everlasting Blessedness, and that Everlasting Life, whereby man is made
   to live; that Perfect Wisdom, whereby man is made wise; that
   Everlasting Light, whereby man becomes enlightened. And see how by this
   touch thou art made what thou wast not, thou dost not make that thou
   touchest be what it was not before. I repeat it, there grows no
   increase to God from them that know Him, but to them that know Him,
   from the knowledge of God. Let us not suppose, dearly beloved Brethren,
   that we confer any benefit on God, because I have said that we give Him
   in a manner a price. For we do not give Him aught whereby He can be
   increased, Who when thou fallest away, is Entire, and when thou
   returnest, abideth Entire, ready to make Himself seen that He may bless
   those who turn to Him, and punish those with blindness who turn away.
   For by this blindness, as the beginning of punishment, doth He first
   execute vengeance on the soul that turns away from Him. For whoso turns
   away from the True Light, that is from God, is at once made blind. He
   is not yet sensible of his punishment, but he hath it already.

   6. Accordingly, dearly beloved brethren, let us understand that the
   Word of God is incorporeally, inviolably, unchangeably, without
   temporal nativity, yet born of God. Do we think that we can any how
   persuade certain unbelievers that that is not it, consistent with the
   truth, which is said by us according to the Catholic faith, which is
   contrary to the Arians, by whom the Church of God hath been often
   tried, forasmuch as carnal men receive with greater ease what they have
   been accustomed to see? For some have dared to say, "The Father is
   greater than the Son, and precedes Him in thee;" that is, the Father is
   greater than the Son, and the Son is less than the Father, and is
   preceded by the Father in thee. And they argue thus; "If He was born,
   of course the Father was before His Son was born to Him." Attend; may
   He be with me, whilst your prayers assist me, and with godly heed
   desire to receive what He may give, what He may suggest to me; may He
   be with me, that I may be able in some sort to explain what I have
   begun. Yet, brethren, I tell you before I begin, if I shall not be able
   to explain it, do not suppose that it is the failure of the proof, but
   of the man. Accordingly I exhort and entreat you to pray; that the
   mercy of God may be with me, and make the matter be so explained by me,
   as is meet for you to hear, and for me to speak. They then say thus;
   "If He be the Son of God, He was born." This we confess. For He would
   not be a Son, if He were not born. It is plain, the faith admits it,
   the Catholic Church approves it, it is truth. They then go on; "If the
   Son was born to the Father, the Father was before the Son was born to
   Him." This the faith rejects, Catholic ears reject it, it is
   anathematized, whoso entertains this conceit is without, he belongs not
   to the fellowship and society of the saints. Then says he, "Give me an
   explanation, how the Son could be born to the Father, and yet be coeval
   with Him of whom He was born?"

   7. And what can we do, brethren, when we are conveying lessons of
   spiritual things to carnal men; even if so be we ourselves too are not
   carnal, when we intimate these spiritual truths to carnal men, to men
   accustomed to the idea of earthly nativities, and seeing the order of
   these creatures, where succession and departure separates off in age
   them that beget and them that are begotten? For after the father the
   son is born, to succeed the father, who in time of course must die.
   This do we find in men, this in other animals, that the parents are
   first, the children after them in time. Through this custom of
   observation they desire to transfer carnal things to spiritual, and by
   their intentness on carnal things are more easily led into error. For
   it is not the reason of the hearers which follows those who preach such
   things, but custom which even entangles themselves, that they do preach
   such things. And what shall we do? Shall we keep silence? Would that we
   might! For perchance by silence something might be thought of worthy of
   the unspeakable subject. For whatsoever cannot be spoken, is
   unspeakable. Now God is unspeakable. For if the Apostle Paul saith,
   that he "was caught up even unto the third heaven, and that he heard
   unspeakable words;" [3580] how much more unspeakable is He, who showed
   such things, which could not be spoken by him to whom they were shown?
   So then, brethren, it were better if we could keep silence, and say,
   "This the faith contains; so we believe; thou art not able to receive
   it, thou art but a babe; thou must patiently endure till thy wings be
   grown, lest when thou wouldest fly without wings, it should not be the
   free [3581] course of liberty, but the fall of temerity." What do they
   say against this? "O if he had anything to say, he would say it to me.
   This is the mere excuse of one who is at fault. He is overcome by the
   truth, who does not choose to answer." He to whom this is said, if he
   make no answer, though he be not conquered in himself is yet conquered
   in the wavering brethren. For the weak brethren hear it, and they think
   that there is really nothing to be said; and perhaps they think right
   that there is nothing to be said, yet not that there is nothing to be
   felt. For a man can express nothing which he cannot also feel; but he
   may feel something which he cannot express.

   8. Nevertheless, saving the unspeakableness of that Sovereign Majesty,
   lest when we shall have produced certain similitudes against them, any
   one should think that we have by them arrived at that which cannot be
   expressed or conceived by babes (and if it can be at all even by the
   more advanced, it can only be in part, only in a riddle, only "through
   a glass;" but not as yet, "face to face" [3582] ), let us too produce
   certain similitudes against them, whereby they may be refuted, not "it"
   comprehended. For when we say that it may very possibly happen, that it
   may be understood, that He may both be born, and yet Coeternal with Him
   of whom He was born, in order to refute this, and prove it as it were
   to be false, they bring forth similitudes against us. From whence? From
   the creatures, and they say to us, "Every man of course was before he
   begat a son, he is greater in age than his son; and so a horse was
   before he begat his foal, and a sheep, and the other animals." Thus do
   they bring similitudes from the creatures.

   9. What! must we labour too, that we may find resemblances of those
   things which we are establishing? And what if I should not find any,
   might I not rightly say, "The Nativity of the Creator hath, it may be,
   no resemblance of itself among the creatures? For as far as He
   surpasseth the things which are here, in that He is there, so far doth
   He surpass the things which are born here, in that He was born there.
   All things here have their being from God; and yet what is to be
   compared with God? So all things which are born here, are born by His
   agency. And so perhaps there is no resemblance of His Nativity found,
   as there is none found whether of His Substance, Unchangeableness,
   Divinity, Majesty. For what can be found here like these? If then it
   chance that no resemblance of His Nativity either be found, am I
   therefore overwhelmed, because I have not found resemblances to the
   Creator of all things, when desiring to find in the creature what is
   like the Creator?"

   10. And in very truth, Brethren, I am not likely to discover any
   temporal resemblances which I can compare to eternity. But as to those
   which thou hast discovered, what are they? What hast thou discovered?
   That a father is greater in time than his son; and therefore thou
   wouldest have the Son of God to be less in time than the Eternal
   Father, because thou hast found that a son is less than a father born
   in time. Find me an eternal father here, and thou hast found a
   resemblance. Thou findest a son less than a father in time, a temporal
   son less than a temporal father. Hast thou found me a temporal son
   younger than eternal father? Seeing then that in Eternity is stability,
   but in time variety; in Eternity all things stand still, in time one
   thing comes, another succeeds; thou canst find a son of lesser age
   succeeding his father in the variety of time, for that he himself
   succeeded to his father also, not a son born in time to a father
   eternal. How then, Brethren, can we find in the creature aught
   coeternal, when in the creature we find nothing eternal? Do thou find
   an eternal father in the creature, and I will find a coeternal son. But
   if thou find not an eternal father, and the one surpasses the other in
   thee; it is sufficient, that for a resemblance I find something coeval.
   For what is coeternal is one thing what is coeval another. Every day we
   call them coeval who have the same measure of times; the one is not
   preceded by the other in time, yet they both whom we call coeval once
   began to "be." Now if I shall be able to discover something which is
   born coeval with that of which it is born; if two coeval things can be
   discovered, that which begets, and that which is begotten; we discover
   in this case things coeval, let us understand in the other things
   coeternal. If here I shall find that a thing begotten hath begun to be
   ever since that which begets began to be, we may understand at least
   that the Son of God did not begin to be, ever since He that begat Him
   did not begin to be. Lo, brethren, perhaps we may discover something in
   the creature, which is born of something else, and which yet began to
   be at the same time as that of which it is born began to be. In the
   latter case, the one began to be when the other began to be; in the
   former the one did not begin to be, ever since the other began not to
   be. The first then is coeval, the second coeternal.

   11. I suppose that your holiness has understood already what I am
   saying, that temporal things cannot be compared to eternal; but that by
   some slight and small resemblance, things coeval may be with things
   coeternal. Let us find accordingly two coeval things; and let us get
   our hints as to these resemblances from the Scriptures. We read in the
   Scriptures of Wisdom, "For she is the Brightness of the Everlasting
   Light." Again we read, "The unspotted Mirror of the Majesty of God."
   [3583] Wisdom Herself is called, "The Brightness of the Everlasting
   Light," is called, "The Image of the Father;" from hence let us take a
   resemblance, that we may find two coeval things, from which we may
   understand things coeternal. O thou Arian, if I shall find that
   something that begets does not precede in time that which it begat,
   that a thing begotten is not less in time than that of which it is
   begotten; it is but just that thou concede to me, that these coeternals
   may be found in the Creator, when coevals can be found in the creature.
   I think that this indeed occurs already to some brethren. For some
   anticipated me as soon as I said, "For She is the Brightness of the
   Everlasting Light." For the fire throws out light, light is thrown out
   from the fire. If we ask which comes from which, every day when we
   light a candle are we reminded of some invisible and indescribable
   thing, that the candle as it were of our understanding may be lighted
   in this night of the world. Observe him who lights a candle. While the
   candle is not lighted, there is as yet no fire, nor any brightness
   which proceedeth from the fire. But I ask, saying, "Does the brightness
   come from the fire, or the fire from the brightness?" Every soul
   answers me (for it has pleased God to sow the beginnings of
   understanding and wisdom in every soul); every soul answers me, and no
   one doubts, that that brightness comes from the fire, not the fire from
   the brightness. Let us then look at the fire as the father of that
   brightness; for I have said before that we are looking for things
   coeval, not coeternal. If I desire to light a candle, there is as yet
   no fire there, nor yet that brightness; but immediately that I have
   lighted it, together with the fire comes forth the brightness also.
   Give me then here a fire without brightness, and I believe you that the
   Father ever was without the Son.

   12. Attend; The matter has been explained by me as so great a matter
   could be, by the Lord helping the earnestness of your prayers, and the
   preparation of your heart, ye have taken in as much as ye were able to
   receive. Yet these things are ineffable. Do not suppose that anything
   worthy of the subject has been spoken, if it only be for that things
   carnal are compared with coeternal, things temporal with things abiding
   ever, things subject to extinction to things immortal. But inasmuch as
   the Son is said also to be the Image of the Father, let us take from
   this too a sort of resemblance, though in things very different, as I
   have said before. The image of a man looking into a glass is thrown out
   from the glass. But this cannot assist us for the clearing of that
   which we are endeavouring in some sort to explain. For it is said to
   me, "A man who looks into a glass of course, was' already, and was born
   before that. The image came out only as soon as he looked at himself.
   For a man who looks in a glass, was' before he came to the glass." What
   then shall we find, from which we may be able to draw out such a
   resemblance, as we did from the fire and the brightness? Let us find
   one from a very little thing. You know without any difficulty how water
   often throws out the images of bodies. I mean, when any one is passing,
   or standing still along the water, he sees his own image there. Let us
   suppose then something born on the water's side, as a shrub, or an
   herb, is it not born together with its image? As soon as ever it begins
   to be, its image begins to be with it, it does not precede in its birth
   its own image; it cannot be showed to me that anything is born upon the
   water's side, and that its image has appeared afterwards, whereas it
   first appeared without its image; but it is born together with its
   image; and yet the image comes from it, not it from the image. It is
   born then together with its image, and the shrub and its image begin to
   be together. Dost thou not confess that the image is begotten of that
   shrub, not the shrub of the image? So then thou dost confess that the
   image is from that shrub. Accordingly that which begets and that which
   is begotten began to "be" together. Therefore they are coeval. If the
   shrub had been always, the image from the shrub would have been always
   too. Now that which has its being from something else, is of course
   born of it. It is possible then that one that begets might always be,
   and always be together with that which was born of him. For here it was
   that we were in perplexity and trouble, how the Eternal Nativity might
   be understood. So then the Son of God is so called on this principle,
   that there is the Father also, that He hath One from whom He derives
   His Being; not on this, that the Father is first in time, and the Son
   after. The Father always was, the Son always from the Father. And
   because whatever "is" from another thing, is born, therefore the Son
   was always born. The Father always was, the image from Him always was;
   as that image of the shrub was born of the shrub, and if the shrub had
   always been, the image would also have always been born from the shrub.
   Thou couldest not find things begotten coeternal with the eternal
   begetters, but thou hast found things born coeval with those that begat
   them in time. I understand the Son coeternal with the Eternal who begat
   Him. For what with regard to things of time is coeval, with regard to
   things eternal is coeternal.

   13. Here there is somewhat for you to consider, Brethren, [3584] as a
   protection against blasphemies. For it is constantly said, "See thou
   hast produced certain resemblances; but the brightness which is thrown
   out from the fire, shines less brilliantly than the fire itself, and
   the image of the shrub has less proper [3585] subsistence, than that
   shrub of which it is the image. These instances have a resemblance, but
   they have not a thorough equality: wherefore they do not seem to be of
   the same substance." What then shall we say, if any one say, "The
   Father then is to the Son, such as the brightness is to the fire, and
   the image to the shrub"? See I have understood the Father to be
   eternal; and the Son to be coeternal with Him; nevertheless say we that
   He is as the brightness which is thrown out from and is less brilliant
   than the fire, or as the image which is reflected from and has less
   real existence than the shrub? No, but there is a thorough equality. "I
   do not believe it," he will say, "because thou hast not discovered a
   resemblance." Well then, believe the Apostle, because he was able to
   see what I have said. For he says, "He thought it not robbery to be
   equal with God." [3586] Equality is [3587] perfect likeness in every
   way. And what said he? "Not robbery." Why? Because that is robbery
   which belongs to another.

   14. Yet from these two comparisons, these two kinds, we may perhaps
   find in the creature a resemblance whereby we may understand how the
   Son is both coeternal with the Father, and in no respect less than He.
   But this we cannot find in one kind of resemblances singly: let us join
   both kinds together. How both kinds? One, of which they themselves give
   instances of resemblances, and the other, of which we gave. For they
   gave instances of resemblances from those things which are born in
   time, and are preceded in time by them of whom they are born, as man of
   man. He that is born first is greater in time; but yet man and man,
   that is of the same substance. For man begets a man, and a horse a
   horse, and a sheep a sheep. These beget after the same substance, but
   not after the same time. They are diverse in time, but not in nature
   diverse. What then do we praise here in this nativity? The equality of
   nature surely. But what is wanting? The equality of time. Let us retain
   the one thing which is praised here, that is, the equality of nature.
   But in the other kind of resemblances, which we gave from the
   brightness of the fire and the image of the shrub, you find not an
   equality of nature, you do find an equality of time. What do we praise
   here? Equality of time. What is wanting? Equality of nature. Join the
   things which you praise together. For in the creatures there is wanting
   something which you praise, in the Creator nothing can be wanting:
   because what you find in the creature, came forth from the Hand of the
   Creator. What then is there in things coeval? Must not that be given to
   God which you praise here in? But what is wanting must not be
   attributed to that Sovereign Majesty, in the which there is no defect.
   See I offer to you things begetting coeval with things begotten: in
   these you praise the equality of time, but find fault with the
   inequality [3588] of nature. What you find fault with, do not attribute
   to God; what you praise, attribute to Him; so from this kind of
   resemblances you attribute to Him instead of a cotemporaneousness a
   coeternity, that the Son may be coeternal with Him of whom He was born.
   But from the other kind of resemblances, which itself too is a creature
   of God, and ought to praise the Creator, what do you praise in them?
   Equality of nature. You had before assigned coeternity by reason of the
   first distinction; by reason of this last, assign equality; and the
   nativity of the same substance is complete. For what is more mad, my
   brethren, than that I should praise the creature in anything which does
   not exist in the Creator? In man I praise equality of nature, shall I
   not believe it in Him who made man? That which is born of man is man;
   shall not that which is born of God, be That which He is of whom He was
   born? Converse have I none with works which God hath not made. Let then
   all the works of the Creator praise Him. I find in the one case a
   cotemporaneousness, I get at the knowledge of a coeternity in the
   other. In the first I find an equality of nature, I understand an
   equality of substance in the other. In this then that is "wholly,"
   which in the other case is found in the several parts, and several
   things. It is then "wholly" here altogether, and not only what is in
   the creature; I find it wholly here, but as being in the Creator, in so
   much higher a way, in that the one is visible, the Other Invisible; the
   one temporal, the Other Eternal; the one changeable, the Other
   Unchangeable; the one corruptible, the Other Incorruptible. Lastly, in
   the case of men themselves, what we find, man and man, are two men;
   here the Father and the Son are One God.

   15. I render unspeakable thanks to our Lord God, that He hath
   vouchsafed, at your prayers, to deliver my infirmity from this most
   perplexed and difficult place. Yet above all things remember this, that
   the Creator transcends indescribably whatever we could gather from the
   creature, whether by the bodily senses, or the thought of the mind. But
   wouldest thou with the mind reach Him? Purify thy mind, purify thine
   heart. Make clean the eye whereby That, whatever It be, may be reached.
   For "blessed are the clean in heart, for they shall see God." [3589]
   But whilst the heart was not cleansed, what could be provided and
   granted more mercifully by Him, than that That Word of whom we have
   spoken so great and so many things, and yet have spoken nothing worthy
   of Him; that That Word, "by whom all things were made," should become
   that which we are, that we might be able to attain to That which we are
   not? For we are not God; but with the mind or the interior eye of the
   heart we can see God. Our eyes dulled by sins, blinded, enfeebled by
   infirmity, desire to see; but we are in hope, not yet in possession. We
   are the children of God. This saith John, who says, "In the beginning
   was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God;" [3590]
   he who lay on the Lord's Breast, who drew in these secrets from the
   Bosom of His Heart; he says, "Dearly beloved, we are the children of
   God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; we know that, when He
   shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is."
   [3591] This is promised us.

   16. But in order that we may attain, if we cannot yet see God the Word,
   let us hear the Word made Flesh; seeing we are carnal, let us hear the
   Word Incarnate. For for this cause came He, for this cause took upon
   Him our infirmity, that thou mightest be able to receive the strong
   words of a God bearing thy weakness. And He is truly called "milk." For
   He giveth milk to infants, that He may give the meat of wisdom to them
   of riper years. Suck then now with patience, that thou mayest be fed to
   thy heart's most [3592] eager wish. For how is even the milk, wherewith
   infants are suckled, made? Was it not solid meat on the table? But the
   infant is not strong enough to eat the meat which is on the table; what
   does the mother do? She turns the meat [3593] into the substance of her
   flesh, and makes milk of it. Makes for us what we may be able to take.
   So the Word was made Flesh, that we little ones, who were indeed as
   infants with respect to food, might be nourished by milk. But there is
   this difference; that when the mother makes the food turned into flesh
   milk, the food is turned into milk; whereas the Word abiding Itself
   unchangeably assumed Flesh, that there might be, as it were, a tissue
   of the two. What He is, He did not corrupt or change, that in thy
   fashion, He might speak to thee, not transformed and turned into man.
   For abiding unalterable, unchangeable, and altogether inviolable, He
   became what thou art in respect of thee, what He is in Himself in
   respect of the Father.

   17. For what doth He say Himself to the infirm, to the end that
   recovering that sight, they may be able in some measure to reach the
   Word by whom all things were made? "Come unto Me, all ye that labour
   and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Take My yoke upon you, and
   learn of Me, that I am meek and lowly in heart." [3594] What doth the
   Master, the Son of God, the Wisdom of God, by whom all things were
   made, proclaim? He calleth the human race, and saith, "Come unto Me,
   all ye that labour, and learn of Me." Thou wast thinking haply that the
   Wisdom of God would say, "Learn how I have made the heavens and the
   stars; how all things also were numbered in Me before they were made,
   how by virtue of unchangeable principles [3595] your very hairs were
   numbered." Didst thou think that Wisdom would say these things, and
   such as these? No. But first that. "That I am meek and lowly in heart."
   Lo, see here what ye can comprehend, brethren; it is surely a little
   thing. We are making our way to great things, let us receive the little
   things, and we shall be great. Wouldest thou comprehend the height of
   God? First comprehend the lowliness of God. Condescend to be humble for
   thine own sake, seeing that God condescended to be humble for thy sake
   too; for it was not for His own. Comprehend then the lowliness of
   Christ, learn to be humble, be loth to be proud. Confess thine
   infirmity, lie patiently before the Physician; when thou shalt have
   comprehended His lowliness, thou risest with Him; not as though He
   should rise Himself in that He is the Word; but thou rather, that He
   may be more and more comprehended by thee. At first thou didst
   understand falteringly and hesitatingly; afterwards thou wilt
   understand more surely and more clearly. He doth not increase, but thou
   makest progress, and He seemeth as it were to rise with thee. So it is,
   brethren. Believe the commandments of God, and do them, and He will
   give you the strength of understanding. Do not put the last first,
   [3596] and, as it were, prefer knowledge to the commandments of God;
   lest ye be only the lower, and none the more firmly rooted. Consider a
   tree; first it strikes downwards, that it may grow up on high; fixes
   its root low in the ground, that it may extend its top to heaven. Does
   it make an effort to grow except from humiliation? And wouldest thou
   without charity comprehend these transcendent matters, shoot toward the
   heaven without a root? This were a ruin, not a growing. With "Christ"
   then "dwelling in your hearts by faith, be ye rooted and grounded in
   charity, that ye may be filled with all the fulness of God." [3597]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3575] John i. 3.

   [3576] Luke ii. 14.

   [3577] John i. 1.

   [3578] Ps. civ. 24.

   [3579] John i. 1.

   [3580] 2 Cor. xii. 4.

   [3581] Aura.

   [3582] 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

   [3583] Wisd. vii. 26.

   [3584] Propter.

   [3585] Proprietatem.

   [3586] Phil. ii. 6.

   [3587] Conjungitur.

   [3588] Disparilitatem.

   [3589] Matt. v. 8.

   [3590] John i. 1.

   [3591] 1 John iii. 2.

   [3592] Avidè.

   [3593] Incarnat.

   [3594] Matt. xi. 28, 29.

   [3595] Rationum.

   [3596] Præsumatis.

   [3597] Eph. iii. 17 and 19.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXVIII.

   [CXVIII. Ben.]

   On the same words of the Gospel, John i., "In the beginning was the
   word," etc.

   1. All ye who are looking for a man's many words, understand the One
   Word of God, "In the beginning was the Word." [3598] Now, "In the
   beginning God made the heaven and the earth." [3599] But, "The Word
   was," since we have heard, "In the beginning God made." Acknowledge we
   in Him the Creator; for Creator is He who made; and the creature what
   He made. For no creature which was made "was," as God the Word "was,"
   by whom it was made, always. Now when we heard "The Word was," with
   whom was It? We understand the Father who did not make nor create the
   Same Word, but begat Him. For, "In the beginning God made the heaven
   and the earth." Whereby made He them? "The Word was, and the Word was
   with God;" [3600] but what kind of Word? Did it sound and so pass away?
   Was it a mere thought, and motion [3601] of the mind? No. Was it
   suggested by memory, and uttered? No. What kind of Word then? Why dost
   thou look for many words from me? "The Word was God." When we hear,
   "The Word was God," we do not make a second God; but we understand the
   Son. For the Word is the Son of God. Lo, the Son, and What but God? For
   "The Word was God." What the Father? God of course. If the Father is
   God and the Son God, do we make two Gods? God forbid. The Father is
   God, the Son God; but the Father and the Son One God. For the Only Son
   of God was not made, but born. "In the beginning God made the heaven
   and the earth;" but the Word was of the Father. Was the Word therefore
   made by the Father? No. "All things were made by Him." [3602] If by Him
   all things were made, was He too made by Himself? Do not imagine that
   He by whom thou hearest all things were made was Himself made among all
   things. For if He were made Himself, all things were not made by Him,
   but Himself was made among the rest. You say, "He was made;" what, by
   Himself? Who can make himself? If then He was made, how by Him were all
   things made? See, Himself too was made, as you say, not I, for that He
   was begotten, I do not deny. If then you say that He was made, I ask by
   what, by whom? By Himself? Then He "was," before He was made, that He
   might make Himself. But if all things were made by Him, understand that
   He was not Himself made. If thou art not able to understand, believe,
   that thou mayest understand. Faith goes before; understanding follows
   after; since the Prophet says, "Unless ye believe, ye shall not
   understand. [3603] The Word was." Look not for time in Him, by whom
   times were made. "The Word was." But you say, "There was a time that
   the Word was not." You say falsely; nowhere do you read this. But I do
   read for you, "In the beginning was the Word." What look you for before
   the beginning? But if you should be able to find anything before the
   beginning, this will be the beginning. He is mad who looks for anything
   before the beginning. What then doth he say was before the beginning?
   "In the beginning was the Word."

   2. But you will say, "The Father both was,' and was before the Word."
   What are you looking for? "In the beginning was the Word." What you
   find, understand; seek not for what you are not able to find. Nothing
   is before the beginning. "In the beginning was the Word." The Son is
   the Brightness of the Father. Of the Wisdom of the Father, which is the
   Son, it is said, "For He is the brightness of the Everlasting Light."
   [3604] Are you seeking for a Son without a Father? Give me a light
   without brightness. If there was a time when the Son was not, the
   Father was a light obscure. For how was He not an obscure Light, if It
   had no brightness? So then the Father always, the Son always. If the
   Father always, the Son always. Do you ask of me, whether the Son were
   born? I answer, "born." For He would not be a Son if not born. So when
   I say, the Son always was, I say in fact was always born. And who
   understands, "Was always born"? Give me an eternal fire, and I will
   give thee an eternal brightness. We bless God who hath given to us the
   holy Scriptures. Be ye not blind in the brightness of the light.
   Brightness is engendered of the Light, and yet the Brightness is
   Coeternal with the Light that engenders It. The Light always, its
   Brightness always. It begat Its Own Brightness; but was it ever without
   Its Brightness? Let God be allowed to beget an eternal Son. I pray you
   hear of whom we are speaking; hear, mark, believe, understand. Of God
   are we speaking. We confess and believe the Son coeternal with the
   Father. But you will say, "When a man begets a Son, he that begets is
   the elder, and he that is begotten the younger." It is true; in the
   case of men, he that begets is the elder, and he that is begotten, the
   younger, and he arrives in time to his father's strength. But why, save
   that whilst the one grows, the other grows old? Let the father stand
   still a while, and in his growing the son will follow on him, and you
   will see him equal. But see, I give you whereby to understand this.
   Fire engenders a coeval brightness. Among men you only find sons
   younger, fathers older; you do not find them coeval: but as I have
   said, I show you brightness coeval with its parent fire. For fire
   begets brightness, yet is it never without brightness. Since then you
   see that the brightness is coeval with its fire, suffer God to beget a
   Coeternal Son. Whoso understandeth, let him rejoice: but whoso
   understandeth not, let him believe. For the word of the Prophet cannot
   be disannulled; "Unless ye believe, ye shall not understand." [3605]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3598] John i. 1.

   [3599] Gen. i. 1.

   [3600] John i. 1.

   [3601] Volvebatur.

   [3602] John i. 3.

   [3603] Isa. vii. 9, Sept.

   [3604] Wisd. vii. 26.

   [3605] Isa. vii. 9, Sept.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXIX.

   [CXIX. Ben.]

   On the same words, John i. "In the beginning was the word," etc.

   1. That our Lord Jesus Christ in seeking lost man was made Man, our
   preaching has never withholden, and your faith has ever retained; and
   moreover, that this our Lord, who for our sakes was made Man, was
   always God with the Father, and always will be, yea rather always Is;
   for where there is no succession of time, there is no "hath been" and
   "will be." For that of which it is said, "it hath been," is now no
   more; that of which it is said, "it will be," is not yet; but He always
   is, because He truly "is," that is, is unchangeable. For the Gospel
   lesson has just now taught us a high and divine mystery. For this
   beginning of the Gospel St. John poured forth [3606] for that he drank
   it in from the Lord's Breast. For ye remember, that it has been very
   lately read to you, how that this St. John the Evangelist lay in the
   Lord's Bosom. [3607] And wishing to explain this clearly, he says, "On
   the Lord's Breast;" [3608] that we might understand what he meant, by
   "in the Lord's bosom." For what, think we, did he drink in who was
   lying on the Lord's Breast? Nay, let us not think, but drink; [3609]
   for we too have just now heard what we may drink in.

   2. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
   Word was God." [3610] O glorious preaching! O [3611] the result of the
   full feast of the Lord's Breast! "In the beginning was the Word." Why
   seekest thou for what was before It? "In the beginning was the Word."
   If the Word had been made (for made indeed that was not by which all
   things were made); if the Word had been made, the Scripture would have
   said, "In the beginning God made the Word;" as it is said in Genesis,
   "In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth." [3612] God then
   did not in the beginning make the Word; because, "In the beginning was
   the Word." This Word which was in the beginning, where was It? Follow
   on, "And the Word was with God." But from our daily hearing the words
   of men we are wont to think lightly of this name of "Word." In this
   case do not think lightly of the Name of "Word;" "The Word was God. The
   same," that is the Word, "was in the beginning with God. All things
   were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made."

   3. Extend your hearts, help the poverty of my words. What I shall be
   able to express, give ear to; on what I shall not be able to express,
   meditate. Who can comprehend the abiding Word? All our words sound, and
   pass away. Who can comprehend the abiding Word, save He who abideth in
   Him? Wouldest thou comprehend the abiding Word? Do not follow the
   current of the flesh. For this flesh is indeed a current; for it has
   none abiding. As it were from a kind of secret fount of nature men are
   born, they live, they die; or whence they come, or whither they go, we
   know not. It is a hidden water, till it issue from its source; it flows
   on, and is seen in its course; and again it is hidden in the sea. Let
   us despise this stream flowing on, running, disappearing, let us
   despise it. "All flesh is grass, and all the glory of flesh is as the
   flower of grass. The grass withereth, the flower falleth away."
   Wouldest thou endure? "But the word of the Lord endureth for ever."
   [3613]

   4. But in order to succour us, "The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt
   among us." [3614] What is, "The Word was made Flesh"? The gold became
   grass. It became grass for to be burned; the grass was burned, but the
   gold remained; in the grass It perisheth not, yea, It changed the
   grass. How did It change it? It raised it up, quickened it, lifted it
   up to heaven, and placed it at the right Hand of the Father. But that
   it might be said, "And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us,"
   let us recollect awhile what went before. "He came unto His Own, and
   His Own received Him not. But as many as received Him, to them gave He
   power to become the sons of God." "To become," for they "were" not; but
   He "was" Himself in the beginning. "He gave them" then "power to become
   the sons of God, to them that believe in His Name; who were born not of
   blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
   God." [3615] Lo, born they are, in whatever age of the flesh they may
   be; ye see infants; see and rejoice. Lo, they are born; but they are
   born of God. Their mother's womb is the water of baptism.

   5. Let no man in poorness of soul entertain this conceit, and turn over
   such most beggarly thoughts in his mind, and say to himself, "How in
   the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
   God: all things were made by Him;' and lo, the Word was made flesh, and
   dwelt among us?'" Hear why it was done. "To those" we know "who
   believed on Him He hath given power to become the sons of God." Let not
   those then to whom He hath given power to become the sons of God, think
   it impossible to become the sons of God. "The Word was made flesh, and
   dwelt among us." Do not imagine that it is too great a thing for you to
   become the sons of God; for your sakes He became the Son of man, who
   was the Son of God. If He was made, that He might be less, who was
   more; can He not bring it to pass, that of that less which we were, we
   may be something more? He descended to us, and shall not we ascend to
   Him? For us He accepted our death, and shall He not give us His Life?
   For thee He suffered thy evil things, and shall He not give thee His
   good things?

   6. "But how," one will say, "can it be, that the Word of God, by whom
   the world is governed, by whom all things both were, and are created,
   should contract Himself into the womb of a Virgin; should abandon the
   world, and leave the Angels, and be shut up in one woman's womb?" Thou
   skillest not to conceive of things divine. The Word of God (I am
   speaking to thee, O man, I am speaking to thee of the omnipotence of
   the Word of God) could surely do all, seeing that the Word of God is
   omnipotent, at once remain with the Father, and come to us; at once in
   the flesh come forth to us, and lay concealed in Him. For He would not
   the less have been, if He had not been born of flesh. He "was" before
   His own flesh; He created His Own mother. He chose her in whom He
   should be conceived, He created her of whom He should be created. Why
   marvellest thou? It is God of whom I am speaking to thee: "The Word was
   God."

   7. I am treating of the Word, and perchance the word of men may furnish
   somewhat like; though very unequal, far distant, in no way comparable,
   yet something which may convey a hint to you by way of resemblance. Lo,
   the word which I am speaking to you, I have had previously in my heart:
   it came forth to thee, yet it has not departed from me; that began to
   be in thee, which was not in thee; it continued with me when it went
   forth to thee. As then my word was brought forth to thy sense, yet did
   not depart from my heart; so That Word came forth to our senses, yet
   departed not from His Father. My word was with me, and it came forth
   into a voice: the Word of God was with the Father, and came forth into
   Flesh. But can I do with my voice that which He could do with His
   Flesh? For I am not master [3616] of my voice as it flies; He is not
   only master of His Flesh, that It should be born, live, act; but even
   when dead He raised It up, and exalted unto the Father the Vehicle as
   it were in which He came forth to us. You may call the Flesh of Christ
   a Garment, you may call It a Vehicle, and as perchance Himself
   vouchsafed to teach us, you may call It His Beast; for on this beast He
   raised him who had been wounded by robbers; [3617] lastly, as He said
   Himself more expressly, you may call It a Temple; This Temple knows
   death no more, Its seat is at the right Hand of the Father: in This
   Temple shall He come to judge the quick and dead. What He hath by
   precept taught, He hath by example manifested. What He hath in His own
   Flesh shown, that oughtest thou to hope for in thy flesh. This is
   faith; hold fast what as yet thou seest not. Need there is, that by
   believing thou abide firm in that thou seest not; lest when thou shalt
   see, thou be put to shame.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3606] Ructuavit.

   [3607] John xiii. 23.

   [3608] John xiii. 25.

   [3609] Non putemus sed potemus.

   [3610] John i. 1.

   [3611] Saginam Dominici pertoris eructuare.

   [3612] Gen. i. 1.

   [3613] Isa. xl. 6, 7, Sept.; 1 Pet. i. 24, 25.

   [3614] John i. 14.

   [3615] John i. 11-14.

   [3616] Tenere.

   [3617] Luke x. 30.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXX.

   [CXX. Ben.]

   On the same words of John i., "In the beginning was the word," etc.

   1. The beginning of John's Gospel, "In the beginning was the Word."
   [3618] Thus he begins, this he saw, and transcending the whole
   creation, mountains, air, the heavens, the stars, Thrones, Dominions,
   Principalities, Powers, all Angels, and Archangels, transcending all;
   he saw the Word in the beginning, and drank It in. He saw above every
   creature, he drank in from the Lord's breast. For this same St. John
   the Evangelist is he whom Jesus specially loved; insomuch that he lay
   on His Breast at supper. There was this secret, that therefrom might be
   drunk in, what in the Gospel was to be poured forth. Happy they who
   hear and understand. Of the next degree of blessedness are they who
   though they understand not, believe. For how great a thing it is to see
   This Word of God, who can explain in human words?

   2. Lift up your hearts, my Brethren, lift them up as best ye can;
   whatsoever occurs to you from the idea of any body whatsoever, reject.
   If the Word of God occurs to you under the idea of the light of this
   sun, expand, extend how you will, set no bounds in your thought to that
   light; it is nothing to the Word of God. Whatsoever of this sort the
   mind conceives, is less in one part than in the whole. Of theWord
   conceive as Whole everywhere. Understand ye what I say; because of my
   stress of time I am limiting myself as much as I can for your sakes.
   Understand ye what I say. Lo, this light from heaven, which is called
   by the name of the sun, when it comes forth, it enlightens the earth,
   unfolds the day, develops forms, distinguishes colours. Great blessing
   it is, great gift of God to all mortal men; let His works magnify Him.
   If the sun is so beauteous, what more beauteous than the sun's Maker?
   And yet look, Brethren; lo, he pours his rays through the whole earth;
   penetrates open places, the closed resist him; he sends his light
   through windows; can he also through a wall? To the Word of God all is
   open, from the Word of God nothing is hid. Observe another difference,
   how far from the Creator is the creature, especially the bodily
   creature. When the sun is in the East, it is not in the West. Its light
   indeed shed from that vast body reaches even to the West; but itself is
   not there. When it begins to set, then it will be there. When it rises,
   it is in the East; when it sets it is in the West. By these operations
   of his, it has given name to those quarters. Because it is in the East
   when it rises at the East, it has made it be called the Rising Sun;
   because it is at the West when it sets at the West, it has made it be
   called the Setting Sun. At night it is nowhere seen. Is the Word of God
   so? When It is in the East, is It not in the West; or when It is in the
   West, is It not in the East? or does It ever leave the earth, and go
   under or behind the earth? It is Whole everywhere. Who can in words
   explain this? Who see it? By what means of proof shall I establish to
   you what I say? I am speaking as a man, it is to men I speak; I am
   speaking as one weak, to men weaker am I speaking. And yet, my
   brethren, I am bold to say that I do in some sort see what I am saying
   to you, though "through a glass," or "darkly," I do in some sort
   understand even within my heart a word touching this thing. But it
   seeks to go forth to you, and finds no meet vehicle. The vehicle of the
   word is the sound of the voice. What I am saying within mine own self I
   seek to say to you, and words fail. For I wish to speak of the Word of
   God. How great a Word, what kind of Word? "All things were made by
   Him." [3619] See the works, and stand in awe of the Worker. "All things
   were made by Him."

   3. Return with me, O human infirmity, return, I say. Let us comprehend
   these human things if we can. We are men, I who speak, I am a man, and
   to men I speak, and utter the sound of my voice. I convey the sound of
   my voice to men's ears, and by the sound of my voice I somehow through
   the ear lay up understanding also in the heart. Let us then speak on
   this point what and how we can, let us comprehend it. But if we have
   not ability to comprehend even this, in respect of the Other what are
   we? Lo, ye are listening to me; I am speaking a word. If any one goes
   out from us, and is asked outside what is being done here, he answers,
   "The Bishop is speaking a word." I am speaking a word of the Word. But
   what a word, of what a Word? A mortal word, of the Word Immortal; a
   changeable word, of the Word Unchangeable; a passing word of the Word
   Eternal. Nevertheless, consider my word. For I have told you already,
   the Word of God is Whole everywhere. See, I am speaking a word to you;
   what I say reaches to all. Now that what I am saying might come to you
   all, did ye divide what I say? If I , were to feed you, to wish to fill
   not your minds, but your bodies, and to set loaves before you to be
   satisfied therewith; would ye not divide my loaves among you? Could my
   loaves come to every one of you? If they came to one only, the rest
   would have none. But now see, I am speaking, and ye all receive. Nay,
   not only all receive, but all receive it whole. It comes whole to all,
   to each whole. O the marvels of my word! What then is the Word of God?
   Hear again. I have spoken; what I have spoken, has gone forth to you,
   and has not gone away from me. It has reached to you, and has not been
   separated from me. Before I spake, I had it, and ye had not; I spake,
   and ye began to have, and I lost nothing. O the marvel of my word! What
   then is the Word of God? From little things form conjectures of things
   great. Consider earthly things, laud the heavenly. I am a creature, ye
   are creatures; and such great miracles are done with my word in my
   heart, in my mouth, in my voice, in your ears, in your hearts. What
   then is the Creator? O Lord, hear us. Make us, for that Thou hast made
   us. Make us good, for that Thou hast made us enlightened men. These
   white-robed, enlightened ones hear Thy word by me. For enlightened by
   Thy grace they stand before Thee. "This is the day which the Lord hath
   made." [3620] Only let them labour, let them pray for this, that when
   these days shall have gone by, they may not become darkness, who have
   been made the light of the wonders and the blessings of God.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3618] John i. 1.

   [3619] John i. 3.

   [3620] Ps. cxviii. 24.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXI.

   [CXXI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John i. 10, "The world was made through
   him," etc.

   1. By the Lord "was the world made, and the world knew Him not." [3621]
   What world was made by Him, what world knew Him not? For it is not the
   same world that was made by Him, which knew Him not. What is the world
   that was made by Him? The heaven and earth. How did not the heaven know
   Him, when at His Passion the sun was darkened? How did not the earth
   know Him, when as He hung upon the Cross, it quaked? But "the world
   knew Him not," whose Prince he is, of whom it is said, "Behold, the
   prince of this world cometh, and findeth nothing in me." [3622] Wicked
   men are called the world; unbelieving men are called the world. They
   have gotten their name from that they love. By the love of God we are
   made gods; so by the love of the world, we are called the world. But
   "God was in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself." [3623] "The
   world" then "knew Him not." What? "all men?"

   2. "He came unto His Own, and His Own received Him not." [3624] All
   things are His, but they are called His Own, from among whom His mother
   was, among whom He had taken Flesh, to whom He had sent before the
   heralds of His advent, to whom He had given the law, whom He had
   delivered from the Egyptian bondage, whose father Abraham according to
   the flesh He elected. For He said truth, "Before Abraham was, I am."
   [3625] He did not say, "Before Abraham was," or "before Abraham was
   made, I was made." For "in the beginning the Word was," not, "was
   made." So then "He came unto His Own," He came to the Jews. "And His
   Own received Him not."

   3. "But as many as received Him." [3626] For of course the Apostles
   were there, who "received Him." There were they who carried branches
   before His beast. They went before and followed after, and spread their
   garments, and cried with a loud voice, "Hosanna to the Son of David,
   Blessed is He That cometh in the Name of the Lord." [3627] Then said
   the Pharisees unto Him, "Restrain the children, that they cry not out
   so unto Thee." And He said, "If these shall hold their peace, the
   stones will cry out." [3628] Us He saw when He spake these words; "If
   these shall hold their peace, the stones will cry out." Who are stones,
   but they who worship stones? If the Jewish children shall hold their
   peace, the elder and the younger Gentiles shall cry out. Who are the
   stones, but they of whom speaketh that very John, who came "to bear
   witness of the Light"? [3629] For when he saw these self-same Jews
   priding themselves on their birth from Abraham, he said to them, "O
   generation of vipers." [3630] They called themselves the children of
   Abraham; and he addressed them, "O generation of vipers." Did he do
   Abraham wrong? God forbid! He gave them a name from their character.
   For that if they were the children of Abraham, they would imitate
   Abraham; as He too telleth them who say to Him, "We be free, and were
   never in bondage to any man; we have Abraham for our father." And He
   said, "If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the deeds of Abraham.
   Ye wish to kill Me, because I tell you the truth. This did not
   Abraham." [3631] Ye were of his stock, but ye are a degenerate stock.
   So then what said John? "O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to
   flee from the wrath to come?" Because they came to be baptized with the
   baptism of John unto repentance. "Who hath warned you to flee from the
   wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance. And
   say not in your hearts, We have Abraham to our father. For God is able
   of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham." [3632] For God is
   able of these stones which he saw in the Spirit; to them he spake; he
   foresaw us; "For God is able of these stones to raise up children unto
   Abraham." Of what stones? "If these shall hold their peace, the stones
   will cry out." Ye have just now heard, and cried out. It is fulfilled,
   "The stones shall cry out." For from among the Gentiles we came, in our
   forefathers we worshipped stones. Therefore are we called dogs too.
   Call to mind what that woman heard who cried out after the Lord, for
   she was a Canaanitish woman, a worshipper of idols, the handmaid of
   devils. What said Jesus to her? "It is not good to take the children's
   bread, and to cast it to dogs." [3633] Have ye never noticed, how dogs
   will lick the greasy stones? So are all the worshippers of images. But
   grace has come to you. "But as many as received Him, to them gave He
   power to become the sons of God." See ye have here some just now born:
   to them hath He "given power to become the sons of God." To whom hath
   He given it? "To them that believe in His Name."

   4. And how do they become the sons of God? "Who were born, not of
   blood, nor of the will of man, nor of the will of the flesh, but of
   God." [3634] Having received power to become the sons of God, they are
   born of God. Mark then: They are born of God, "not of blood," like
   their first birth, like that wretched birth, issuing out of
   wretchedness. But they who are born of God, what were they? whereby
   were they first born? Of blood; of the joint blood of the male and
   female, of the carnal union of male and female, from this were they
   born. From whence now? They are born of God. The first birth of the
   male and female; the second birth of God and the Church.

   5. Lo, they are born of God; whereby is it brought to pass that they
   should be born of God, who were first born of men? Whereby is it
   brought to pass, whereby? "And the Word was made Flesh, that It might
   dwell among us." [3635] Wondrous exchange; He made Flesh, they spirit.
   What is this? What condescension is here, my brethren! Lift up your
   minds to the hope and comprehension of better things. Give not
   yourselves up to worldly desires. "Ye have been bought with a Price;"
   [3636] for your sakes the Word was made Flesh; for your sakes He who
   was the Son of God, was made the Son of man: that ye who were the sons
   of men, might be made sons of God. What was He, what was He made? What
   were ye, what were ye made? He was the Son of God. What was He made?
   The Son of man. Ye were the sons of men. What were ye made? The sons of
   God. He shared with us our evil things, to give us His good things. But
   even in that He was made the Son of man, He is different much from us.
   We are the sons of men by the lust of the flesh; He the Son of man by
   the faith of a virgin. The mother of any other man whatever conceives
   by a carnal union; and every one is born of human parents, his father
   and his mother. But Christ was born of the Holy Ghost, and the Virgin
   Mary. He came to us, but from Himself departed not far; yea from
   Himself as God He departed never; but added what He was to our nature.
   For He came to that which He was not, He did not lose what He was. He
   was made the Son of man; but did not cease to be the Son of God. Hereby
   the Mediator, in the middle. What is, "in the middle"? Neither up
   above, nor down below. How neither up above, nor down below? Not above,
   since He is Flesh; not below, since He is not a sinner. But yet in so
   far as He is God, above always. For He did not so come to us, as to
   leave the Father. From us He went, and did not leave us; to us will He
   come again, and will not leave Him.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3621] John i. 10.

   [3622] John xiv. 30.

   [3623] 2 Cor v. 19.

   [3624] John i. 11.

   [3625] John viii. 58.

   [3626] John i. 12.

   [3627] Matt. xxi. 9.

   [3628] Luke xix. 39, 40.

   [3629] John i. 8.

   [3630] Matt. iii. 7.

   [3631] John viii. 39, 40.

   [3632] Luke iii. 7, 8.

   [3633] Matt. xv. 26.

   [3634] John i. 13.

   [3635] John i. 14.

   [3636] 1 Cor. vi. 20.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXII.

   [CXXII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John i. 48,"When thou wast under the fig
   tree, I saw thee," etc.

   1. What we have heard said by the Lord Jesus Christ to Nathanael, if we
   understand it aright, does not concern him only. For our Lord Jesus saw
   the whole human race under the fig-tree. For in this place it is
   understood that by the fig-tree He signified sin. Not that it always
   signifies this, but as I have said in this place, in that fitness of
   significancy, in which ye know that the first man, when he sinned,
   covered himself with fig leaves. For with these leaves they covered
   their nakedness when they blushed for their sin; [3637] and what God
   had made them for members, they made for themselves occasions of shame.
   For they had no need to blush for the work of God; but the cause of sin
   preceded shame. If iniquity had not gone before, nakedness would never
   have been put to the blush. For "they were naked, and were not
   ashamed." [3638] For they had committed nothing to be ashamed for. But
   why have I said all this? That we may understand that by the fig-tree
   sin is signified. What then is, "when thou wast under the fig-tree, I
   saw thee"? [3639] When thou wast under sin, I saw thee. And Nathanael
   looking back upon what had occurred, remembered that he had been under
   a fig-tree, where Christ was not. He was not there, that is, by His
   Bodily Presence; but by His knowledge in the Spirit where is He not?
   And because he knew that he was under the fig-tree alone, where the
   Lord Christ was not; when He said to him, "When thou wast under the
   fig-tree, I saw thee;" he both acknowledged the Divinity in Him, and
   cried out, "Thou art the King of Israel." [3640]

   2. The Lord said, "Because I said unto thee, I saw thee when thou wast
   under the fig-tree, marvellest thou? thou shalt see greater things than
   these." [3641] What are these greater things? And He said, "Ye shall
   see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon
   the Son of Man." [3642] Let us call to mind the old story written in
   the sacred Book. I mean in Genesis. [3643] When Jacob slept at a
   certain place, he put a stone at his head; and in his sleep he saw a
   ladder reaching from earth even unto heaven; and the Lord was resting
   upon it; and Angels were ascending and descending by it. This did Jacob
   see. A man's dream would not have been recorded, had not some great
   mystery been figured in it, had not some great prophecy been to be
   understood in that vision. Accordingly, Jacob himself, because he
   understood what he had seen, placed a stone there, and anointed it with
   oil. Now ye recognise the anointing; recognise The Anointed also. For
   He is "the Stone which the builders rejected; He was made the Head of
   the corner." [3644] He is the Stone of which Himself said, "Whosoever
   shall stumble against This Stone shall be shaken; but on whomsoever
   That Stone shall fall, It will crush him." [3645] It is stumbled
   against as It lies on the earth; but It will fall on him, when He shall
   come from on high to judge the quick and dead. Woe to the Jews, for
   that when Christ lay low in His humility, they stumbled against Him.
   "This Man," say they, "is not of God, because He breaketh the sabbath
   day." [3646] "If He be the Son of God, let Him come down from the
   cross." [3647] Madman, the Stone lies on the ground, and so thou
   deridest It. But since thou dost deride It, thou art blind; since thou
   art blind, thou stumblest; since thou stumblest, thou art shaken; since
   thou hast been shaken by It as It now lies on the ground, hereafter
   shall thou be crushed by It as It fails from above. Therefore Jacob
   anointed the stone. Did he make an idol of it? He showed [3648] a
   meaning in it, but did not adore it. Now then give ear, attend to this
   Nathanael, by the occasion of whom the Lord Jesus hath been pleased to
   explain to us Jacob's vision.

   3. Ye that are well instructed in the school of Christ, know that this
   Jacob is Israel too. They are two names; for they are one man. His
   first name Jacob, which is by interpretation supplanter, he received
   when he was born. For when those twins were born, his brother Esau was
   born first; and the hand of the younger was found on the elder's foot.
   [3649] He held his brother's foot who preceded him in his birth, and
   himself came after. And because of this occurrence, because he held his
   brother's heel, [3650] he was called Jacob, that is, Supplanter. And
   afterwards, when he was returning from Mesopotamia, the Angel wrestled
   with him in the way. [3651] What comparison can there be between an
   Angel's and a man's strength? Therefore it is a mystery, a sacrament, a
   prophecy, a figure; let us therefore understand it. For consider the
   manner of the struggle too. While he wrestleth, Jacob prevailed against
   the Angel. Some high meaning is here. And when the man had prevailed
   against the Angel, he kept hold of Him; yes, the man kept hold of Him
   whom he had conquered. And said to Him, "I will not let Thee go, except
   Thou bless me." [3652] When the conqueror was blessed by the Conquered,
   Christ was figured. So then that Angel, who is understood to be the
   Lord Jesus, saith to Jacob, "Thou shalt not be any more called Jacob,
   but Israel shall thy name be," [3653] which is by interpretation,
   "Seeing God." After this He touched the sinew of his thigh, the broad
   part, that is, of the thigh, and it dried up; and Jacob became lame.
   Such was He who was conquered. So great power had this Conquered One,
   as to touch the thigh, and make lame. It was then with His Own will
   that He was conquered. For He "had power to lay down" His strength,
   "and He had power to take It up." [3654] He is not angry at being
   conquered, for He is not angry at being crucified. For He even blessed
   him, saying, "Thou shalt not be called Jacob, but Israel." Then the
   "supplanter" was made "the seer of God." And He touched, as I have
   said, his thigh, and made him lame. Observe in Jacob the people of the
   Jews, those thousands who followed and went before the Lord's beast,
   who in concert with the Apostles worshipped the Lord, and cried out,
   "Hosanna to the Son of David, Blessed is He that cometh in the Name of
   the Lord." [3655] Behold Jacob blessed. He has continued lame until now
   in them who are at this day Jews. For the broad part of the thigh
   signifies the multitude of increase. Of whom the Psalm, when it
   prophesied that the Nations should believe, speaketh, saying, "A people
   whom I have not known, hath served Me; by the hearing of the ear it
   hath obeyed Me." [3656] I was not there, and I was heard; here I was,
   and I was killed. "A people whom I have not known, hath served Me; by
   the hearing of the ear it hath obeyed Me." Therefore, "faith cometh by
   hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ." [3657] And it goes on,
   "The strange children have lied unto Me;" concerning the Jews. "The
   strange children have lied unto Me, the strange children have faded
   away and have halted from their paths." I have pointed out Jacob to
   you, Jacob blessed and Jacob lame.

   4. But as arising out of this occasion, this must not be passed over,
   which may haply of itself perplex some of you; with what design is it,
   that when this Jacob's grandfather Abraham's name was changed (for he
   too was first called Abram, and God changed his name, and said, "Thou
   shall not be called Abram, but Abraham" [3658] ); from that time he was
   not called Abram. Search in the Scriptures, and you will see that
   before he received another name, he was called only Abram; after he
   received it, he was called only Abraham. But this Jacob, when he
   received another name, heard the same words, "Thou shalt not be called
   Jacob, but Israel shalt thou be called." [3659] Search the Scriptures,
   and see how that he was always called both, both Jacob and Israel.
   Abram after he had received another name, was called only Abraham.
   Jacob after he had received another name, was called both Jacob and
   Israel. The name of Abraham was to be developed in this world; for here
   he was made the father of many nations, whence he received his name.
   But the name of Israel relates to another world, where we shall see
   God. Therefore the people of God, the Christian people in this present
   time, is both Jacob and Israel, Jacob in fact, Israel in hope. For the
   younger people is called the Supplanter of its brother the elder
   people. What! have we supplanted the Jews? No, but we are said to be
   their supplanters, for that for our sakes they were supplanted. If they
   had not been blinded, Christ would not have been crucified; His
   precious Blood would not have been shed; if that Blood had not been
   shed, the world would not have been redeemed. Because then their
   blindness hath profited us, therefore hath the elder brother been
   supplanted by the younger, and the younger is called the Supplanter.
   But how long shall this be?

   5. The time will come, the end of the world will come, and all Israel
   shall believe; not they who now are, but their children who shall then
   be. For these present walking in their own ways, will go to their own
   place, will pass on to everlasting damnation. But when they shall have
   been made all one people, that shall come to pass which we sing, "I
   shall be satisfied when Thy glory shall be manifested." [3660] When the
   promise which is made to us, that we "see face to face," shall come.
   "Now we see through a glass darkly," and "in part;" [3661] but when
   both people, now purified, now raised again, now crowned, now changed
   into an immortal form, and into everlasting incorruption, shall see God
   face to face, and Jacob shall be no more, but there shall be Israel
   only; then shall the Lord see him in the person of this holy Nathanael,
   and shall say, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile."
   [3662] When thou dost hear, "Behold an Israelite indeed;" let Israel
   come into thy mind; when Israel shall come into thy mind, let his dream
   come into thy mind, in which he saw a ladder from earth even to heaven,
   the Lord standing upon it, the Angels of God ascending and descending.
   This dream did Jacob see. But after this he was called Israel; that is,
   some little time after as he came from Mesopotamia, and on his journey.
   If then Jacob saw the ladder, and he is also called Israel; and this
   Nathanael is an "Israelite indeed in whom is no guile;" therefore when
   he wondered because the Lord. said to him, "I saw thee under the
   fig-tree;" [3663] did He say to him, "Thou shalt see greater things
   than these." [3664] And so He announced to him Jacob's dream. To whom
   did He announce it? To him whom He called "an Israelite, in whom was no
   guile." As if He had said, "His dream, by whose name I have called
   thee, shall be manifested in thee; make no haste to wonder, "thou shalt
   see greater things than these. Ye shall see heaven open, and the Angels
   of God ascending and descending unto the Son of Man." [3665] See what
   Jacob saw; see why Jacob anointed the stone with oil; see why Jacob
   prophetically signified and prefigured the Anointed One. For that
   action was a prophecy.

   6. Now I know what you are waiting for; I understand what you would
   hear from me. This too will I briefly declare, as the Lord enableth me;
   "ascending and descending unto the Son of Man." How--if they descend to
   Him, He is here; if they ascend to Him, He is above. But if they ascend
   to Him, and descend toHim, He is at once above and here. It cannot any
   way possibly be, that they should ascend to Him, and descend to Him,
   unless He be both there whither they ascend, and here whither they
   descend--How do we prove that He is both there, and that He is here?
   Let Paul, who was first Saul, answer us. He found it by experience,
   when he was first a persecutor, and afterwards became a preacher; first
   Jacob, afterwards Israel; who was himself too "of the stock of Israel,
   of the tribe of Benjamin." [3666] In him let us see Christ above,
   Christ below. First, the very Voice of the Lord from heaven shows this;
   "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" [3667] What! had Paul ascended
   into heaven? Had Paul so much as cast a stone into heaven? He was
   persecuting the Christians, binding them, haling them to be put to
   death, searching them out in every place where they lay hid, when they
   were found on no consideration sparing them. To whom the Lord Christ
   saith, "Saul, Saul." Whence crieth He? From heaven. Therefore He is
   above. "Why persecutest thou Me?" Therefore He is below. Thus have I
   explained all, though briefly, yet as well as I could to you, Beloved.
   I have ministered to you according to my duty, and now for your duty,
   do ye think upon the poor. Let us turn to the Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3637] Gen. iii. 7.

   [3638] Gen. ii. 25.

   [3639] John i. 48.

   [3640] John i. 49.

   [3641] John i. 50.

   [3642] John i. 51.

   [3643] Gen. xxviii. 11.

   [3644] Ps. cxviii. 22.

   [3645] Matt. xxi. 44.

   [3646] John ix. 16.

   [3647] Matt. xxvii. 40.

   [3648] Significavit.

   [3649] Gen. xxv. 25, 26.

   [3650] Plantam.

   [3651] Gen. xxxii. 24.

   [3652] Gen. xxxii. 26.

   [3653] Gen. xxxv. 10.

   [3654] John x. 18.

   [3655] Matt. xxi. 9.

   [3656] Ps. xvii. 43, 44, Sept. (xviii. 43, 44, English version).

   [3657] Rom. x. 17.

   [3658] Gen. xvii. 5.

   [3659] Gen. xxxii. 28, xxxv. 10.

   [3660] Ps. xvi. 15, Sept. (xvii. 15, English version).

   [3661] 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

   [3662] John i. 47.

   [3663] John i. 48.

   [3664] John i. 50.

   [3665] John i. 51.

   [3666] Phil. iii. 5.

   [3667] Acts ix. 4.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXIII.

   [CXXIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John ii. 2, "and Jesus also was bidden, and
   his disciples, to the marriage."

   1. Ye know, Brethren, for ye have learnt it as believing in Christ, and
   continually too do we by our ministry impress it upon you, that the
   humility of Christ is the medicine of man's swollen pride. For man
   would not have perished, had he not been swollen up through pride. For
   "pride," as saith the Scripture, "is the beginning of all sin." [3668]
   Against the beginning of sin, the beginning of righteousness was
   necessary. If then pride be the beginning of all sin, whereby should
   the swelling of pride be cured, had not God vouchsafed to humble
   Himself? Let man blush to be proud, seeing that God hath humbled
   Himself. For when man is told to humble himself, he disdains it; and
   when men are injured, it is pride that makes them wish to be avenged.
   Forasmuch as they disdain to humble themselves, they wish to be
   avenged; as if another's punishment could be any profit to any man. One
   who has been hurt and suffered wrong wishes to be avenged; he seeks his
   own remedy from another's punishment, and gains a great torment. The
   Lord Christ therefore vouchsafed to humble Himself in all things,
   showing us the way; if we but think meet to walk thereby.

   2. Among His other acts, lo, the Virgin's Son comes to the marriage;
   who being with the Father instituted marriage. As the first woman, by
   whom came sin, was made of a man without a woman; so the Man by whom
   sin was done away, was made of a woman without a man. By the first we
   fell, by the other we rise. And what did He at this marriage? Of water
   He made wine. What greater sign of power? He who had power to do such
   things, vouchsafed to be in need. He who made of water wine could also
   have of stones made bread. The power was the same; but then the devil
   tempted Him, therefore Christ did it not. For ye know that when the
   Lord Christ was tempted, the devil suggested this to Him. For He was an
   hungred, since this too He vouchsafed to be, since this too made part
   of His Humiliation. The Bread was hungry, as the Way fainted, as saving
   Health was wounded, as the Life died. When then He was an hungred as ye
   know, the tempter said to Him, "If Thou be the Son of God, command that
   these stones be made bread." [3669] And He made answer to the tempter,
   teaching thee to answer the tempter. For to this end does the general
   fight, that the soldiers may learn. What answer did He make? "Man doth
   not live by bread alone, but by every word of God." [3670] And He did
   not make bread of the stones, who of course could as easily have done
   it, as He made of water wine. For it is an exercise of the same power
   to make bread of stone; but He did it not, that He might despise the
   tempter's will. For no otherwise is the tempter overcome, but by being
   despised. And when He had overcome the devil's temptation, "Angels came
   and ministered to Him." [3671] He then who had so great power, why did
   He not do the one, and do the other? Read, yea, recollect what thou
   hast just heard, when He did this, when, that is, He made of the water
   wine; what did the Evangelist add? "And His disciples believed on Him."
   [3672] Would the devil on the other occasion have believed on Him?

   3. He then who could do so great things, was hungry, and athirst, was
   wearied, slept, was apprehended, beaten, crucified, slain. This is the
   way; walk by humility, that thou mayest come to eternity. Christ-God is
   the Country whither we go; Christ-Man is the Way whereby we go. To Him
   we go, by Him we go; why fear we lest we go astray? He departed not
   from the Father; and came to us. He sucked the breasts, and He
   contained the world. He lay in the manger, and He fed the Angels. God
   and Man, the same God who is Man, the same Man who is God. But not God
   in that wherein He is Man, God, in that He is the Word; Man, in that
   the Word was made Flesh; by at once continuing to be God, and by
   assuming man's Flesh; by adding what He was not, not losing what He
   was. Therefore henceforward, having now suffered in this His
   humiliation, dead, and buried, He has now risen again, and ascended
   into heaven, there He is, and sitteth at the right Hand of the Father:
   and here He is needy in His poor. Yesterday too I set this forth to
   your Affection by occasion of what He said to Nathanael, "Thou shalt
   see a greater thing than this. For I say unto you, Ye shall see Heaven
   open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending unto the Son of
   Man." [3673] We searched out what this meant, and spake at some length;
   must we recapitulate the same to-day? Let those who were present
   remember; yet I will briefly run over it.

   4. He would not say, "ascending unto the Son of Man," unless He were
   above; He would not say, "descending unto the Son of Man," unless He
   were also below. He is at once above, and below; above in Himself,
   below in His; above with the Father, below in us. Whence also was that
   Voice to Saul, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?" [3674] He would
   not say, "Saul, Saul," unless that He was above. But Saul was not
   persecuting Him above. He then who was above would not have said, "Why
   persecutest thou me?" unless He were below also. Fear Christ above;
   recognise Him below. Have Christ above bestowing His bounty, recognise
   Him here in need. Here He is poor, there He is rich. That Christ is
   poor here, He tells us Himself for me, "I was an hungred, I was
   thirsty, I was naked, I was a stranger, I was in prison." [3675] And to
   some He said, "Ye have ministered unto Me," and to some He said, "Ye
   have not ministered unto Me." Lo, we have proved Christ poor; that
   Christ is Rich, who knows not? And even here it was a property of these
   riches to turn the water into wine. If he who has wine is rich, how
   rich is He who maketh wine? So then Christ is rich and poor; as God,
   rich; as Man, poor. Yea rich too now as Very Man He hath ascended into
   heaven, sitteth at the right Hand of the Father; yet still He is poor
   and hungry here, thirsty, and naked.

   5. What art thou? Rich, or poor? Many tell me, I am poor; and they tell
   the truth. I recognise some poor having something, and some having
   want. But some have much gold and silver. O that they would acknowledge
   themselves poor! Poor they will acknowledge themselves, if they
   acknowledge the poor about them. For how is it? How much soever thou
   hast, thou rich man whosoever thou art, thou art God's beggar. The hour
   of prayer comes, and there I prove thee. Thou makest thy petition. How
   art thou not poor, who makest thy petition? I say more, Thou makest
   petition for bread. Wilt thou not have to say, "Give us our daily
   bread"? [3676] Thou, who askest for daily bread, art thou poor, or
   rich? And yet Christ saith to thee, "Give Me of that which I have given
   thee. For what didst thou bring here, when thou camest hither? All
   things that I created, thyself created hast found here; nothing didst
   thou bring, nothing shalt thou take away. Why wilt thou not give Me of
   Mine Own? For thou art full, and the poor man is empty. Look at your
   first origin; naked were ye both born. Thou too then wast born naked.
   Great store hast thou found here; didst thou bring ought with thee? I
   ask for Mine Own; give, and I will repay. Thou hast found Me a
   bountiful giver, make Me at once thy debtor. It is not enough to say,
   Thou hast found Me a bountiful giver, make Me at once thy debtor;' let
   Me regard thee as lending upon interest. Thou givest me but little, I
   will repay more. Thou givest me earthly things, I will repay heavenly.
   Thou givest me temporal things, I will restore eternal. I will restore
   thee to thyself, when I shall have restored thee unto Me."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3668] Ecclus. x. 13.

   [3669] Matt. iv. 3.

   [3670] Matt. iv. 4.

   [3671] Matt. iv. 11.

   [3672] John ii. 11.

   [3673] John i. 50, 51.

   [3674] Acts ix. 4.

   [3675] Matt. xxv. 35, etc.

   [3676] Matt. vi. 11.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXIV.

   [CXXIV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John v. 2, "Now there is in Jerusalem by
   the Sheep Gate a pool," etc.

   1. The lesson of the Gospel has just sounded in our ears, and made us
   intent to know what is the meaning of what has been read. This, I
   suppose, is looked for from me, this I promise, by the Lord's
   assistance, to explain as well as I can. For without doubt it is not
   without a meaning, that those miracles were done, and something they
   figured out to us bearing on eternal saving [3677] health. For the
   health of the body which was restored to this man, of how long duration
   was it? "For what is your life?" saith Holy Scripture; "it is a vapour
   that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away." [3678]
   Therefore in that health was restored to this man's body for a time,
   some enduringness was restored to a vapour. So then this is not to be
   valued much; "Vain is the health of man." [3679] And, brethren,
   recollect that Prophetical and Evangelical testimony, for it is read in
   the Gospel; "All flesh is grass, and all the glory of flesh as the
   flower of grass; the grass withereth, the flower falleth away, the Word
   of the Lord endureth for ever." [3680] The Word of the Lord
   communicateth glory even to the grass, and no transitory glory; for
   even to flesh He giveth immortality.

   2. But first passeth away the tribulation of this life, out of which He
   giveth us help, to whom we have said, "Give us help from tribulation."
   [3681] And all this life is indeed a tribulation to the understanding.
   For there are two tormentors of the soul, torturing it not at once, but
   alternating their tortures. These two tormentors' names are, Fear and
   Sorrow. When it is well with thee, thou art in fear; when it is ill,
   thou art in sorrow. This world's prosperity, whom doth it not deceive,
   its adversity not break? In this grass, and in the days of grass, the
   surer way must be kept to, the Word of God. For when it had been said,
   "All flesh is grass, and all the glory of flesh as the flower of grass,
   the grass withereth, the flower falleth away;" as though we should ask,
   "What hope has grass? what stability the flower of grass?" it is said,
   "but the Word of the Lord endureth for ever." And whence, you will say,
   is that Word to me? "The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us."
   [3682] For the Word of the Lord saith to thee, "Do not reject My
   promise, for I have not rejected thy grass." This then that the Word of
   the Lord hath granted to us, that we might hold to Him, that we might
   not pass away with the flower of grass; this, I say, that He hath
   granted to us, that the Word should be made Flesh, taking Flesh, not
   changed into flesh, abiding, and assuming, abiding what He was,
   assuming what He was not; this, I say, that He hath granted to us, that
   pool also signifies. [3683]

   3. I am speaking briefly. That water was the Jewish people; the five
   porches were the Law. For Moses wrote five books. Therefore was the
   water enclosed by five porches as that people was held in by the Law.
   The troubling of the water is the Lord's Passion among that people. He
   who descended was healed, and only one; for this is unity. Whosoever
   are offended at the Passion of Christ are proud; they will not descend,
   they are not healed. And, say they, "Am I to believe that God was
   Incarnate, that God was born of a woman, that God was crucified,
   scourged, dead, wounded, buried?" Be it far from me to believe this of
   God, it is unworthy of Him. Let the heart speak, not the neck. To the
   proud the humiliation of the Lord seems unworthy of Him, therefore is
   saving health from such far off. Lift not thyself up; if thou wouldest
   be made whole, descend. Well might piety be alarmed, if Christ in the
   flesh subject to change were only spoken of. But now the truth sets
   forth to thee, Christ Unchangeable in His Nature as the Word. For, "In
   the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God;" not a word to
   sound, and so pass away; for "the Word was God." [3684] So then thy God
   endureth unchangeable. O true piety; thy God endureth, fear not; He
   doth not perish, and through Him, thou too dost not perish. He
   endureth, He is born of a woman, but in the Flesh. The Word made even
   His Mother. He who was before He was made, made her in whom He was to
   be made Himself. He was an infant, but in the Flesh. He sucked, He
   grew, He took nourishment, He ran through the several stages of life,
   He came to man's estate, but in the Flesh. He was wearied, and He
   slept, but in the Flesh. He suffered hunger and thirst, but in the
   Flesh. He was apprehended, bound, scourged, assailed with railings,
   crucified finally, and killed, but in the Flesh. Why art thou alarmed?
   "The Word of the Lord endureth for ever." Whoso rejecteth this
   humiliation of God, doth not wish for healing from the deadly swelling
   of pride.

   4. So then by His Flesh did the Lord Jesus Christ grant hope to our
   flesh. For He took on Him what we knew well in this earth, what
   aboundeth here, to be born, and to die. To be born and to die, abounded
   here; to rise again and to live for ever, was not here. Poor earthly
   merchandize found He here, He brought here strange and heavenly. If
   thou art alarmed at death, love the resurrection. He hath given thee
   help out of tribulation; for vain thy health had ever been. Let us
   acknowledge therefore and love the saving health in this world strange,
   that is, health everlasting, and live we in this world as strangers.
   Let us think that we are but passing away, so shall we be sinning less.
   Let us rather give thanks to our Lord God, that He hath been pleased
   that the last day of this life should be both near and uncertain. From
   the earliest infancy even to decrepit old age, it is but a short span.
   If Adam had died to-day, what would it have profited him, that he had
   lived so long? What "long time" is there in that in which there is an
   end? No one recalleth yesterday; to-day is pressed on by to-morrow,
   that it may pass away. In this little span let us live well, that we
   may go whence we may not pass away. And now even as we are talking, we
   are indeed passing away. Our words run on, and the hours fly by; so
   does our age, so our actions, so our honours, so our misery, so our
   happiness here below. All passeth away, but let us not be alarmed; "The
   Word of God endureth for ever." Let us turn to the Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3677] Throughout this chapter there is the double meaning in the
   original of salus for "health" and "salvation."

   [3678] Jas. iv. 14.

   [3679] Ps. lx. 11.

   [3680] Isa. xl. 6, 7; Jas. i. 10; 1 Pet. i. 24, 25.

   [3681] Ps. lx. 11.

   [3682] John i. 14.

   [3683] John v.

   [3684] John i. 1.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXV.

   [CXXV. Ben.]

   Again in John v. 2, etc., on the five porches, where lay a great
   multitude of impotent folk, and of the pool of Siloa.

   1. Subjects strange neither to your ears nor hearts are now repeated:
   yet do they revive the affections of the hearer, and by repetition in
   some sort renew us: nor is it wearisome to hear what is well known
   already, for the words of the Lord are always sweet. The exposition of
   the sacred Scriptures is as the sacred Scriptures themselves: though
   they be well known, yet are they read to impress the remembrance of
   them. And so the exposition of them, though it be well known, is
   nevertheless to be repeated, that they who have forgotten it may be
   reminded, or they who chanced not to hear it may hear; and that with
   those who do retain what they are used to hear, it may by the
   repetition be brought to pass that they shall not be able to forget it.
   For I remember that I have already spoken to you, Beloved, on this
   lesson of the Gospel. Yet to repeat the same explanation to you is not
   wearisome, even as it was not wearisome to repeat the same Lesson to
   you. The Apostle Paul saith in a certain Epistle, "To write the same
   things to you, to me indeed is not wearisome, but for you it is
   necessary." [3685] So too with myself to say the same things to you, to
   me is not wearisome, but for you it is safe.

   2. The five porches in which the infirm folk lay signify the Law, which
   was first given to the Jews and to the people of Israel by Moses the
   servant of God. For this Moses the minister of the Law wrote five
   books. In relation therefore to the number of the books which he wrote,
   the five porches figured the Law. But because the Law was not given to
   heal the infirm, but to discover and to manifest them; for so saith the
   Apostle, "For if there had been a law given which could have given
   life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law; But the
   Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of
   Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe;" [3686] therefore in
   those porches the sick folk lay, but were not cured. For what saith he?
   "If there had been a law given which could have given life." Therefore
   those porches which figured the Law could not cure the sick. Some one
   will say to me, "Why then was it given?" The Apostle Paul hath himself
   explained: "Scripture," saith he, "hath concluded all under sin, that
   the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that
   believe." For these folk who were sick, thought themselves to be whole.
   They received the Law, which they were not able to fulfil; they learnt
   in what disease they were, and they implored the Physician's aid; they
   wished to be cured because they came to know they were in distress,
   which they would not have known if they had not been unable to fulfil
   the Law which had been given. For man thought himself innocent, and
   from this very pride of false innocence became more mad. To tame this
   pride then and to lay it bare, the Law was given; not to deliver the
   sick, but to convince the proud. Attend then, Beloved; to this end was
   the Law given, to discover diseases, not to take them away. And so then
   those sick folk who might have been sick in their own houses with
   greater privacy, if those five porches had not existed, were in those
   porches set forth to the eyes of all men, but were not by the porches
   cured. The Law therefore was useful to discover sins, because that man
   being made more abundantly guilty by the transgression of the Law,
   might, having tamed his pride, implore the help of Him That pitieth.
   Attend to the Apostle; "The Law entered that sin might abound; but
   where sin abounded, grace hath much more abounded." [3687] What is,
   "The Law entered that sin might abound"? As in another place he saith,
   "For where there is no law, there is no transgression." [3688] Man may
   be called a sinner before the Law, a transgressor he cannot. But when
   he hath sinned, after that he hath received the Law, he is found not
   only a sinner, but a transgressor. Forasmuch then as to sin is added
   transgression, therefore "hath sin abounded." And when sin abounds,
   human pride learns at length to submit itself, and to confess to God,
   and to say "I am weak." To say to those words of the Psalm which none
   but the humbled soul saith, "I said, Lord, be merciful unto me; heal my
   soul, for I have sinned against thee." [3689] Let the weak soul then
   say this that is at least convinced by transgression, and not cured,
   but manifested by the Law. Hear too Paul himself showing thee, both
   that the Law is good, and yet that nothing but the grace of Christ
   delivereth from sin. For the Law can prohibit and command; apply the
   medicine, that that which doth not allow a man to fulfil the Law, may
   be cured, it cannot, but grace only doeth that. For the Apostle saith,
   "For I delight in the Law of God after the inner man." [3690] That is,
   I see now that what the Law blames is evil, and what the Law commands
   is good. "For I delight in the Law of God after the inner man. I see
   another law in my members resisting the law of my mind, and bringing me
   into captivity in the law of sin." This derived from the punishment of
   sin, from the propagation of death, from the condemnation of Adam,
   "resists the law of the mind, and brings it into captivity in the law
   of sin which is in the members." He was convinced; he received the Law,
   that he might be convinced: see now what profit it was to him that he
   was convinced. Hear the following words, "Wretched man that I am, who
   shall deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of God through
   Jesus Christ our Lord." [3691]

   3. Give heed then. Those five porches were significative of the Law,
   bearing the sick, not healing them; discovering, not curing them. But
   who did cure the sick? He that descended into the pool. And when did
   the sick man descend into the pool? When the Angel gave the sign by the
   moving of the water. For thus was that pool sanctified, for that the
   Angel came down and moved the water. Men saw the water; and from the
   motion of the troubled water they understood the presence of the Angel.
   If any one then went down, he was cured. Why then was not that sick man
   cured? Let us consider his own words; "I have no man," he says, "when
   the water is moved, to put me into the pool, but while I am coming,
   another steppeth down." [3692] Couldest not thou then step down
   afterwards, if another step down before thee? Here it is shown us, that
   only one was cured at the moving of the water. Whosoever stepped down
   first, he alone was cured: but whoever stepped down afterwards, at that
   moving of the water was not cured, but waited till it was moved again.
   What then does this mystery [3693] mean? For it is not without a
   meaning. Attend, Beloved. Waters are put in the Apocalypse for a figure
   of peoples. For when in the Apocalypse John saw many waters, he asked
   what it meant, and it was told him that they were peoples. [3694] The
   water then of the pool signified the people of the Jews. For as that
   people was held in by the five books of Moses in the Law, so that water
   too was enclosed by five porches. When was the water troubled? When the
   people of the Jews was troubled. And when was the people of the Jews
   troubled, but when the Lord Jesus Christ came? The Lord's Passion was
   the troubling of the water. For the Jews were troubled when the Lord
   suffered. See, what was just now read had relation to this troubling.
   "The Jews wished to kill Him, not only because He did these things on
   the sabbaths, but because He called Himself the Son of God, making
   Himself equal with God." [3695] For Christ called Himself the Son after
   one manner, in another was it said to men, "I said, Ye are Gods, and ye
   are all children of the Most High." [3696] For if He had made Himself
   the Son of God in such sort as any man whatever may be called the son
   of God (for by the grace of God men are called sons of God); the Jews
   would not have been enraged. But because they understand Him to call
   Himself the Son of God in another way, according to that, "In the
   beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
   God;" [3697] and according to what the Apostle saith, "Who being in the
   form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God;" [3698] they
   saw a man, and they were enraged, because He made Himself equal with
   God. But He well knew that He was equal, but wherein they saw not. For
   that which they saw they wished to crucify; by That which they saw not,
   they were judged. What did the Jews see? What the Apostles also saw,
   when Philip said, "Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us." [3699] But
   what did the Jews not see? What not even the Apostles saw, when the
   Lord answered, "Have I been so long time with you, and yet have ye not
   known Me? He that seeth Me, seeth the Father also." [3700] Because then
   the Jews were not able to see This in Him, they held Him for a proud
   and ungodly man, making Himself equal with God. Here was a troubling,
   the water was troubled, the Angel had come. For the Lord is called also
   the "Angel of the Great Counsel," [3701] in that He is the messenger of
   the Father's will. For Angel in Greek is in Latin "messenger". So you
   have the Lord saying that He announces to us the kingdom of Heaven. He
   then had come, the "Angel of the Great Counsel," but the Lord of all
   the Angels. "Angel" on this account, because He took Flesh; the "Lord
   of Angels," in that by "Him all things were made, and without Him was
   nothing made." [3702] For if all things, Angels too. And therefore
   Himself was not made, because by Him all things were made. Now what was
   made, was not made without the operation of the Word. But the flesh
   which became the mother of Christ, could not have been born, if it had
   not been created by the Word, which was afterwards born of it.

   4. The Jews then were troubled. What is this? "Why doeth He these
   things on the sabbath days?" And especially at those words of the Lord,
   "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work." [3703] Their carnal
   understanding of this, that God rested on the seventh day from all His
   works, [3704] "troubled them." For this is written in Genesis, and most
   excellently written it is, and on the best reasons. But they thinking
   that God as it were rested from fatigue on the seventh day after all,
   and that He therefore blessed it, because on it He was refreshed from
   His weariness, did not in their foolishness understand, that He who
   made all things by the Word, could not be wearied. Let them read, and
   tell me how could God be wearied, who said, "Let it be made, and it was
   made." To-day if a man could so do, as God did, how would he be
   wearied? He said, "Let there be light, and the light was made." Again,
   "Let there be a firmament, and it was made:" [3705] if indeed He said,
   and it was not done, He was wearied. In another place briefly, "He
   spake, and they were made; He commanded, and they were created." [3706]
   He then who worketh thus, how doth He labour? But if He labour not, how
   doth He rest? But in that sabbath, in which it is said that God rested
   from all His works, in the Rest of God our rest was signified; because
   the sabbath of this world shall be, when the six ages shall have passed
   away. The six days as it were of the world are passing away. One day
   hath passed away, from Adam unto Noe; another from the deluge unto
   Abraham; the third from Abraham unto David; the fourth from David unto
   the carrying away into Babylon; the fifth from the carrying away into
   Babylon unto the advent of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now the sixth day is
   in passing. We are in the sixth age, in the sixth day. Let us then be
   reformed after the image of God, because that on the sixth day man was
   made after the image of God. [3707] What formation did then, let
   reformation do in us, and what creation did there, let creating-anew do
   in us. After this day in which we now are, after this age, the rest
   which is promised to the saints and prefigured in those days, shall
   come. Because in very truth too, after all things which He made in the
   world, He hath made nothing new in creation afterwards. The creatures
   themselves shall be transformed and changed. For since the creatures
   were fashioned, nothing more has been added. But nevertheless, if He
   who made did not rule the world, what is made would fall to ruin: He
   cannot but administer that which He hath made. Because then nothing
   hath been added to the creation, He is said to have rested from all His
   works; but because He doth not cease to govern what He made, rightly
   did the Lord say, "My Father worketh even hitherto." Attend, Beloved.
   He finished, He is said to have rested; for He finished His works, and
   hath added no more. He governeth what He hath made; therefore He doth
   not cease to work. But with the same facility that He made, with the
   same doth He govern. For do not suppose, brethren, that when He created
   He did not labour, and that He laboureth in that He governeth: as in a
   ship, they labour who build the ship, and they who manage it labour
   too; for they are men. For with the same facility wherewith "He spake
   and they were made," with the same facility and judgment doth He govern
   all things by the Word.

   5. Let us not, because human affairs seem to be in disorder, fancy that
   there is no governance of human affairs. For all men are ordered in
   their proper places; but to every man it seems as though they have no
   order. Do thou only look to what thou wouldest wish to be; for as thou
   shalt wish to be, the Master [3708] knoweth where to place thee. Look
   at a painter. Before him are placed various colours, and he knows where
   to set each colour on. Questionless the sinner hath chosen to be the
   black colour; does not then the Artist [3709] know where to place him?
   How many parts does the painter finish off with the colour of black?
   how many ornaments does he make of it? With it he makes the hair, the
   beard, the eye-brows; he makes the face of white only. Look then to
   that which thou wouldest wish to be; take no care where He may order
   thee who cannot err, He knoweth where to place thee. For so we see it
   happen by the common laws of the world. Some man, for instance, has
   chosen to be a house-breaker: the law of the judge knows that he has
   acted contrary to the law: the law of the judge knows where to place
   him; and orders him most properly. He indeed has lived evilly; but not
   evilly has the law ordered him. From a house-breaker he will be
   sentenced to the mines; from the labour of such how great works are
   constructed? That condemned man's punishment is the city's ornament. So
   then God knoweth where to place thee. Do not think that thou art
   disturbing the counsel of God, if thou art minded to be disorderly.
   Doth not He who knew how to create, know how to order thee? Good were
   it for thee to strive for this, to be set in a good place. What was
   said of Judas by the Apostle? "He went unto his own place." [3710] By
   the operation of course of Divine Providence, because by an evil will
   he chose to be evil, but God did not by ordering evil make it. But
   because that evil man himself chose to be a sinner, he did what he
   would, and suffered what he would not. In that he did what he would,
   his sin is discovered; in that he suffered what he would not, the order
   of God is praised.

   6. Wherefore have I said all this? That ye, brethren, may understand
   what was most excellently said by the Lord Jesus Christ, "My Father
   worketh even hitherto." In that He doth not abandon the creature which
   He made. And He said, "As He worketh, so do I also work." In this He at
   once signified that He was equal with God. "My Father," saith He,
   "worketh hitherto, and I work." Their carnal sense touching the rest
   [3711] was troubled. For they thought that the Lord being wearied
   rested, that He should work no more. They hear, "My Father worketh even
   hitherto:" they are troubled. "And I work:" [3712] He hath made Himself
   equal with God: they are troubled. But be not alarmed. The water is
   troubled, now the sick man is to be cured. What meaneth this? Therefore
   are they troubled, that the Lord may suffer. The Lord doth suffer, the
   precious Blood is shed, the sinner is redeemed, grace is given to the
   sinner, to him that saith, "Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
   me from the body of this death? The grace of God, through Jesus Christ
   our Lord." [3713] But how is he cured? If he step down. For that pool
   was so made, that men should go down, and not come up to it. For there
   might be pools of such a kind, so constructed, that men must go up to
   them. But why was this made in such a way that men must go down to it?
   Because the Lord's Passion searches for the humble. Let the humble go
   down, let him not be proud, if he wishes to be cured. But why was it
   but "one"? Because the Church is only One throughout the world, unity
   is saved. When then one is made whole, unity is signified. By one
   understand unity. Depart not then from unity, if thou wouldest not be
   without a part in this saving [3714] cure.

   7. What then does it mean that the man was in infirmity thirty-eight
   years? I know, brethren, that I have spoken of this already; but even
   those who read forget, how much more they who hear but seldom? Attend
   therefore for a little while, Beloved. In [3715] the number forty, the
   accomplishment of righteousness is figured. The accomplishment of
   righteousness, in that we live here in labour, in toil, in
   self-restraint, in fastings, in watchings, in tribulations; this is the
   exercise of righteousness, to bear this present time, and to fast as it
   were from this world; not from the food of the body, which we do but
   seldom; but from the love of the world, which we ought to do always. He
   then fulfils the law who abstains from this world. For he cannot love
   that which is eternal, unless he shall cease to love that which is
   temporal. Consider a man's love: think of it as, so to say, the hand of
   the soul. If it is holding anything, it cannot hold anything else. But
   that it may be able to hold what is given to it, it must leave go what
   it holds already. This I say, see how expressly I say it; "Whoso loveth
   the world cannot love God; he hath his hand engaged." God saith to him,
   "Hold what I give." He will not leave go what he was holding; he cannot
   receive what is offered. Have I said a man should not possess ought? If
   he is able, if perfection require this of him, let him not possess. If
   hindered by any necessity he is not able, let him possess, not be
   possessed; let him hold, not be held; let him be the lord of his
   possessions, not the slave; as saith the Apostle "However, brethren,
   the time is short; it remaineth that both they that have wives, be as
   though they had not; and they who buy, as though they possessed not;
   and they who rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they who weep,
   as though they wept not; and they who use this world, as though they
   used [3716] it not; for the fashion of this world passeth away. I would
   have you be without carefulness." [3717] What is, "Do not love what
   thou dost possess in this world"? Let it not hold thine hand fast, by
   which God must be held. Let not thy love be engaged, whereby thou canst
   make thy way to God, and cleave to Him who created thee.

   8. Thou wilt say and make answer to me, "Yea, God knows that I possess
   innocently what I have." Temptation proves thee. There is a troubling
   of thy possessions, and thou dost blaspheme. It is but lately we were
   in such a case. There is a troubling of thy possessions, and thou art
   not found what thou wast, and dost show that there is one thing in thy
   mouth to-day, and another in thy mouth yesterday. And I would that thou
   wouldest only defend thine own even with vehemence; [3718] and not try
   to usurp with audacity another's; and what is worse, to escape
   reprehension, maintain that what is another's is thine own. But why
   need I say more? This I advise, this I say, Brethren, and as a brother
   advise; God bids, and I admonish because I am admonished. He alarmeth
   me, who doth not allow me to keep silence. He exacteth of me what He
   hath given. For He hath given it to be laid out, not to be kept up. And
   if I should keep it and hide it, He saith to me, "Thou wicked and
   slothful servant, wherefore gavest thou not My money to the exchangers,
   that at My coming I might require it with usury?" [3719] And what will
   it profit me that I have lost nothing of that which I received? That is
   not enough for my Lord, He is covetous; but God's covetousness is our
   salvation. He is covetous, He looketh for His own money, He gathereth
   in His Own image. "Thou shouldest have given," saith He, "the money to
   the exchangers, that at My coming I might require it with usury." And
   if by any chance forgetfulness should make me fail of admonishing you,
   the temptations and tribulations at least which we are suffering, would
   be an admonition to you. Ye have heard at least the word of God.
   Blessed be the Lord and His glory. For ye are here gathered together,
   and are hanging on the word of God's minister. Turn not your attention
   to our flesh, by which the word is given out to you; for hungry men
   regard not the meanness of the dish, but the preciousness of the food.
   God is proving you. Ye are gathered together, ye praise the word of
   God; temptation will prove in what manner ye hear it: ye will have the
   active business of life whereby your true character will be shown. For
   so he who to-day is shouting with railings, was yesterday a ready
   listener. Therefore I forewarn; therefore I tell you, therefore I do
   not withhold it, my Brethren, that the time of questioning will come.
   For the Lord maketh question of the righteous and of the ungodly. This
   you know ye have sung, this have we sung together; "The Lord maketh
   question of the righteous and the ungodly." And what follows? "But he
   that loveth iniquity, hateth his own soul." [3720] And in another
   place, "Into the thoughts of the ungodly there shall be questioning
   made." [3721] God doth not make question of thee there, where I
   question thee. I question thy tongue, God questioneth thy thoughts. For
   He knoweth how thou dost hear, and He knoweth how to require, Who
   ordereth me to give. He hath wished me to be a dispenser, the requiring
   He hath reserved to Himself. To admonish, to teach, to rebuke, is ours;
   but to save, and to crown, or to condemn, and to cast into hell, is not
   ours; "But the Judge shall deliver to the officer, and the officer to
   the prison. Verily I say unto thee, thou shalt not go out thence, till
   thou payest the last farthing." [3722]

   9. Let us then return to our subject. The perfection of righteousness
   is shown by the number forty. What is it to fulfil the number forty? To
   restrain one's self from the love of this world. Restraint from
   temporal things, that they be not loved to our destruction, is, as it
   were, fasting from this world. Therefore the Lord fasted forty days,
   and Moses, and Elias. He then who gave His servants the power to fast
   forty days, could He not fast eighty or a hundred? Why then did He not
   will to fast more than He had given His servants to do, but because in
   this number forty is the mystery of fasting, the restraint from this
   world? What is this to say? What the Apostle says; "The world is
   crucified to me, and I to the world." [3723] He then fulfils the number
   forty. And what doth the Lord show? That because Moses did this, this
   Elias, this Christ, that this both the Law, and the Prophets, and the
   Gospel, teach; that thou mayest not think that there is one thing in
   the Law, another in the Prophets, another in the Gospel. All Scripture
   teacheth thee nothing else, but restraint from the love of the world,
   that thy love may speed on to God. As a figure that the Law teaches
   this, Moses fasted forty days. As a figure that the Prophets teach it,
   Elias fasted forty days. As a figure that the Gospel teaches it, the
   Lord fasted forty days. And therefore in the mount too these three
   appeared, the Lord in the middle, Moses and Elias at the sides.
   Wherefore? Because the Gospel itself receives testimony from the Law
   and the Prophets. [3724] But why in the number forty is the perfection
   of righteousness? In the Psalter it is said, "O God, I will sing a new
   song unto Thee, upon a psaltery of ten strings will I sing praises unto
   Thee." [3725] Which signifies the ten precepts of the Law, which the
   Lord came not to destroy, but to fulfil. And the Law itself throughout
   the whole world, it is evident, hath four quarters, the East, and West,
   South, and North, as the Scripture saith. And hence the vessel which
   bare all the emblematic animals, which was exhibited to Peter, when he
   was told, "Kill and eat," [3726] that it might be shown that the
   Gentiles should believe and enter into the body of the Church, just as
   what we eat entereth into our body, and which was let down from heaven
   by four corners (these are the four quarters of the world), showed that
   the whole world should believe. Therefore in the number forty is
   restraint from the world. This is the fulfilling of the Law: now the
   fulfilling of the Law is charity. And therefore before the Pasch we
   fast forty days. For this time before the Pasch is the sign of this our
   toilsome life, wherein, in toils, and cares, and continence, we fulfil
   the Law. But afterwards we celebrate the Pasch, that is, the days of
   the Lord's resurrection signifying our own resurrection. Therefore
   fifty days are celebrated; because the reward of the denarius is added
   to the forty, and it becomes fifty. Why is the reward a denarius? Have
   ye not read, how that they who were hired into the vineyard, whether at
   the first, or sixth, or the last hour, could only receive the denarius?
   [3727] When to our righteousness shall be added its reward, we shall be
   in the number fifty. Yea, and then shall we have none other occupation,
   save to praise God. And therefore throughout those days we say,
   "Hallelujah." For Halleluiah is the praise of God. In this frail estate
   of mortality, in this fortieth number here, as though before the
   resurrection, let us groan in prayers, that we may sing praises then.
   Now is the time of longing, then will be the time of embracing and
   enjoying. Let us not faint in the time of forty, that we may joy in the
   time of fifty.

   10. Now who is he that fulfilleth the Law, but he that hath charity?
   Ask the Apostle, "Charity is the fulfilling of the Law. [3728] For all
   the Law is fulfilled in one word, in that which is written, Thou shalt
   love thy neighbour as thyself." [3729] But the commandment of charity
   is twofold; "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
   with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the great
   commandment. The other is like it; Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
   thyself." They are the words of the Lord in the Gospel: "On these two
   commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets." [3730] Without this
   twofold love the Law cannot be fulfilled. As long as the Law is not
   fulfilled, there is infirmity. Therefore he had two short, who was
   infirm thirty and eight years. What means, "had two short"? He did not
   fulfil these two commandments. What doth it profit that the rest is
   fulfilled, if those are not fulfilled? Hast thou thirty-eight? If thou
   have not those two, the rest will profit thee nothing. Thou hast two
   short, without which the rest avail not, if thou have not the two
   commandments which conduct unto salvation. "If I speak with the tongues
   of men and angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass,
   or a tinkling cymbal. And if I know all mysteries, and all knowledge,
   and if I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not
   charity, I am nothing. And if I distribute all my substance, and if I
   give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me
   nothing." [3731] They are the Apostle's words. All those things
   therefore which he mentioned are as it were the thirty-eight years; but
   because charity was not there, there was infirmity. From that infirmity
   who then shall make whole, but He who came to give charity? "A new
   commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another." [3732] And
   because He came to give charity, and charity fulfilleth the Law, with
   good reason said He, "I came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfil."
   [3733] He cured the sick man, and told him to carry his couch, and go
   unto his house. [3734] And so too He said to the sick of the palsy whom
   He cured. [3735] What is it to carry our couch? The pleasure of our
   flesh. Where we lie in infirmity, is as it were our bed. But they who
   are cured master [3736] and carry it, are not by this flesh mastered.
   So then, thou whole one, master the frailness of thy flesh, that in the
   sign of the forty days' fast from this world, thou mayest fulfill the
   number forty, for that He hath made that sick man whole, "Who came not
   to destroy the Law, but to fulfil."

   11. Having heard this, direct your heart to Godward. Do not deceive
   yourselves. Ask yourselves then when it is well with you in the world ;
   then ask yourselves, whether ye love the world, or whether ye love it
   not; learn to let it go before ye are let go yourselves. What is to let
   it go? Not heartily to love it. Whilst there is yet something with thee
   which thou must one day lose, and either in life or death let it go, it
   cannot be with thee always; whilst I say it is yet with thee, loosen
   thy love; be prepared for the will of God, hang upon God. Hold thee
   fast to Him, whom thou canst not lose against thy will, that if it
   chance thee to lose these temporal things, thou mayest say, "The Lord
   gave, the Lord hath taken away, as it hath pleased the Lord, so is it
   done, blessed be the Name of the Lord." [3737] But if it chance, and
   God so wills it, that the things thou hast be with thee even to the
   last: for thy detachment from this life thou receivest the denarius,
   the fifty, and the perfection of blessedness cometh to pass in thee,
   when thou shalt sing Hallelujah. Having these things which I have now
   brought forward in your memory, may they avail to overthrowing your
   love of the world. Evil is its friendship, deceitful, it makes a man
   the enemy of God. Soon, in one single temptation, a man offendeth God,
   and becometh His enemy. Nay not then becometh His enemy; but is then
   discovered to have been His enemy. For when he was loving and praising
   Him, he was an enemy; but he neither knew it himself, nor did others.
   Temptation came, the pulse is touched, and the fever discovered. So
   then brethren, the love of the world, and the friendship of the world,
   make men the enemies of God. And it does not make good what it
   promises, it is a liar, and deceiveth. Therefore men never cease hoping
   in this world, and who attains to all he hopes for? But whereunto
   soever he attains, what he has attained to is forthwith disesteemed by
   him. Other things begin to be desired, other fond things are hoped for;
   and when they come, whatsoever it is that comes to thee, is
   disesteemed. Hold thee fast then to God, for He can never be of light
   esteem, for nothing is more beautiful than He. For for this cause are
   these things disesteemed, because they cannot stand, because they are
   not what He is. For nought, O soul, sufficeth thee, save He who created
   thee. Whatsoever else thou apprehendest is wretched; for He Alone can
   suffice thee who made thee after His Own likeness. Thus it was
   expressly said, "Lord, show us the Father, and it sufficeth us." [3738]
   There only can there be security; and where security can be, there in a
   certain sort will be insatiable satiety. For thou wilt neither be so
   satiated, as to wish to depart; nor will anything be wanting, as though
   thou couldest suffer want.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3685] Phil. iii. 1, Vulgate.

   [3686] Gal. iii. 21, 22.

   [3687] Rom. v. 20.

   [3688] Rom. iv. 15.

   [3689] Ps. xli. 4.

   [3690] Rom. vii. 22.

   [3691] Rom. vii. 24, 25, Vulgate.

   [3692] John v. 7.

   [3693] Sacramentum.

   [3694] Rev. xvii. 15.

   [3695] John v. 18.

   [3696] Ps. lxxxii. 6.

   [3697] John i. 1.

   [3698] Phil. ii. 6.

   [3699] John xiv. 8.

   [3700] John xiv. 9.

   [3701] Isa. ix. 6, Sept.

   [3702] John i. 3.

   [3703] John v. 17.

   [3704] Gen. ii. 2.

   [3705] Gen. i. 3, 6, 7.

   [3706] Ps. xxxii. 9, Sept. (xxxiii. 9, English version).

   [3707] Gen. i. 27.

   [3708] Artifex.

   [3709] Artifex.

   [3710] Acts i. 25.

   [3711] Sabbato.

   [3712] John v. 17.

   [3713] Rom. vii. 24, 25, Vulg.

   [3714] Salute.

   [3715] Serm. i. (li. Ben.) 32 (xxii.).

   [3716] Vulgate.

   [3717] 1 Cor. vii. 29-32.

   [3718] Clamore.

   [3719] Luke xix. 22, 23.

   [3720] Ps. x. 5, Sept. (xi. 5, English version).

   [3721] Wisd. i. 9.

   [3722] Matt. v. 25, 26.

   [3723] Gal. vi. 14.

   [3724] Rom. iii. 21.

   [3725] Ps. cxliv. 9.

   [3726] Acts x. 13.

   [3727] Matt. xx. 2.

   [3728] Rom. xiii. 10.

   [3729] Gal. v. 14.

   [3730] Matt. xxii. 37-40.

   [3731] 1 Cor. xiii. 1-3.

   [3732] John xiii. 34.

   [3733] Matt v. 17.

   [3734] John v. 8, 9.

   [3735] Mark ii. 9.

   [3736] Continent.

   [3737] Job i. 21, Sept.

   [3738] John xiv. 8.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXVI.

   [CXXVI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John v. 19, "The Son can do nothing of
   Himself, but what He seeth the Father doing."

   1. The mysteries and secrets of the kingdom of God first seek for
   believing men, that they may make them understanding. For faith is
   understanding's step; and understanding faith's attainment. [3739] This
   the Prophet expressly says to all who prematurely and in undue order
   look for understanding, and neglect faith. For he says, "Unless ye
   believe, ye shall not understand." [3740] Faith itself then also hath a
   certain light of its own in the Scriptures, in Prophecy, in the Gospel,
   in the Lessons of the Apostles. For all these things which are read to
   us in this present time, are lights in a dark place, that we may be
   nourished up unto the day. The Apostle Peter says, "We have a more sure
   word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a
   light in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in
   your hearts." [3741]

   2. Ye see then, Brethren, how exceedingly unregulated and disordered in
   their haste are they who like immature conceptions seek an untimely
   birth before the birth; who say to us, "Why dost thou bid me believe
   what I do not see? Let me see something that I may believe. Thou
   biddest me believe whilst yet I see not; I wish to see, and by seeing
   to believe, not by hearing." Let the Prophet speak. "Unless ye believe,
   ye shall not understand." Thou wishest to ascend, and dost forget the
   steps. Surely, out of all order. O man, if I could show thee already
   what thou mightest see, I should not exhort thee to believe.

   3. Faith [3742] then, as it has been elsewhere defined, is "the firm
   support of those who hope, [3743] the evidence of things which are not
   seen." [3744] If they are not seen, how are they evidenced to be? What!
   Whence are these things which thou seest, but from That which thou
   seest not? To be sure thou dost see somewhat that thou mayest believe
   somewhat, and from that thou seest, mayest believe what thou seest not.
   Be not ungrateful to Him who hath made thee see, whereby thou mayest be
   able to believe what as yet thou canst not see. God hath given thee
   eyes in the body, reason in the heart; arouse the reason of the heart,
   wake up the interior inhabitant of thine interior eyes, let it take to
   its windows, examine the creature of God. For there is one within who
   sees by the eyes. For when thy thoughts within thee are on any other
   subject, and the inhabitant within is turned away, the things which are
   before thine eyes thou seest not. For to no purpose are the windows
   open, when he who looks through them is away. It is not then the eyes
   that see, but some one sees by the eyes; awake him, arouse him. For
   this hath not been denied thee; God hath made thee a rational animal,
   set thee over the cattle, formed thee after His Own image. Oughtest
   thou to use them as the cattle do; only to see what to add to thy
   belly, not to thy soul? Stir up, I say, the eye of reason, use thine
   eyes as a man should, consider the heaven and earth, the ornaments of
   the heaven, the fruitfulness of the earth, the flight of the birds, the
   swimming of the fish, the virtue [3745] of the seeds, the order of the
   seasons; consider the works, and seek for the Author; take a view of
   what thou seest, and seek Him whom thou seest not. Believe on Him whom
   thou seest not, because of these things which thou seest. And lest thou
   think that it is with mine own words that I have exhorted thee; hear
   the Apostle saying, "For the invisible things of God from the creation
   of the world are clearly seen by those things which are made." [3746]

   4. These things thou disregardedst, nor didst look upon them as a man,
   but as an irrational animal. The Prophet cried out to thee, and cried
   in vain. "Be ye not like to horse and mule, which have no
   understanding." [3747] These things I say thou didst see, and
   disregard. God's daily miracles were disesteemed, not for their
   easiness, but their constant repetition. For what is more difficult to
   understand than a man's birth, that one who was in existence should by
   dying depart into darkness, [3748] and that one who was not, by being
   born should come forth to light? [3749] What so marvellous, what so
   difficult to comprehend? But with God easy to be done. Marvel at these
   things, awake; at His unusual works, thou canst wonder, are they
   greater than those which thou art accustomed to see? Men wondered that
   our Lord God Jesus Christ filled so many thousands with five loaves;
   [3750] and they do not wonder that through a few grains the whole earth
   is filled with crops. When the water was made wine, [3751] men saw it,
   and were amazed; what else takes place with the rain along the root of
   the vine? He did the one, He does the other; the one that thou mayest
   be fed, the other that thou mayest wonder. But both are wonderful, for
   both are the works of God. Man sees unusual things, and wonders; whence
   is the man himself who wonders? where was he? whence came he forth?
   whence the fashion of his body? whence the distinction of his limbs?
   whence that beautiful form? from what beginnings? what contemptible
   beginnings? And he wonders at other things, when he the wonderer is
   himself a great wonder. Whence then are these things which thou seest
   but from Him whom thou seest not? But as I had begun to say, because
   these things were disesteemed by thee, He came Himself to do unusual
   things, that in these usual ones too thou mightest acknowledge thy
   Creator. [3752] He came to Whom it is said, "Renew signs." [3753] To
   Whom it is said, "Show forth Thy marvellous mercies." [3754] For
   dispensing them He ever was; He dispensed them, and no one marvelled.
   Therefore came He a Little one to the little, He came a Physician to
   the sick, who was able to come when He would, to return when He would,
   to do whatsoever He would, to judge as He would. And this, His will, is
   very righteousness; yea what He willeth, I say, is very righteousness.
   For that is not unrighteous which He willeth, nor can that be right
   which He willeth not. He came to raise the dead, men marvelling that He
   restored a man to the light who was in light already, He who day by day
   bringeth forth to the light those who were not.

   5. These things He did, yet was He despised by the many, who considered
   not so much what great things He did, as how small He was; as though
   they said within themselves, "These are divine things, but He is a
   man." Two things then thou seest, divine works, and a man. If divine
   works cannot be wrought but by God, take heed lest in This Man God lie
   concealed. Attend, I say, to what thou seest, believe what thou seest
   not. He hath not abandoned thee, who hath called thee to believe;
   though He enjoin thee to believe that which thou canst not see: yet
   hath He not given thee up to see nothing whereby thou mayest be able to
   believe what thou dost not see. Is the creation itself a small sign, a
   small indication of the Creator? He also came, He did miracles. Thou
   couldest not see God, a man thou couldest; so God was made Man, that in
   One thou mightest have both what to see, and what to believe. "In the
   beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
   God." [3755] Thus thou hearest, and as yet seest not. Lo, He comes, lo,
   He is born, lo, He comes forth of a woman, who made man and woman. He
   who made man and woman was not made by man and woman. For thou wouldest
   peradventure have been likely to despise Him for being born, the manner
   of His birth canst thou not despise; for He ever was before that He was
   born. Lo, I say, He took a Body, He was clothed in Flesh, He came forth
   from the womb. [3756] Dost thou now see? seest thou now, I say? I ask
   as to the Flesh, but I point out as to That Flesh; something thou
   seest, and something thou seest not. Lo, in this very Birth, there are
   at once two things, one which thou mayest see, and another thou mayest
   not see; but so that by this which thou seest, thou mayest believe that
   which thou seest not. Thou hadst begun to despise, because thou seest
   Him who was born; believe what thou dost not see, that He was born of a
   virgin. "How trifling a person," says one, "is he who was born!" But
   how great is He who was of a virgin born! And He who was born of a
   virgin brought thee a temporal miracle; He was not born of a father, of
   any man, I mean, His father, yet was He born of the flesh. But let it
   not seem impossible to thee, that He was born by His mother only, Who
   made man before father and mother.

   6. He brought thee then a temporal miracle, that thou mayest seek and
   admire Him who is Eternal. For He "who came forth as a Bridegroom out
   of His chamber," [3757] that is, out of the virgin's womb, where the
   holy nuptials were celebrated of the Word and the Flesh: He brought, I
   say, a temporal miracle; but He is Himself eternal, He is coeternal
   with the Father, He it is, who "In the beginning was the Word, and the
   Word was with God, and the Word was God." [3758] He did for thee
   whereby thou mightest be cured, that thou mightest be able to see what
   thou didst not see. What thou despisest in Christ, is not yet the
   contemplation of him that is made whole, but the medicine of the sick.
   Do not hasten to the vision of the whole. The Angels see, the Angels
   rejoice, the Angels feed Thereon and live; Whereon they feed faileth
   not, nor is their food minished. In the thrones of glory, in the
   regions of the heavens, in the parts which are above the heavens, the
   Word is seen by the Angels, and is their Joy; is their Food, and
   endureth. But in order that man might eat Angel's Bread, the Lord of
   Angels became Man. This is our Salvation, the Medicine of the infirm,
   the Food of the whole.

   7. And He spake to men, and said what ye have now heard, "The Son can
   do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do." [3759] Is
   there now any one, think we, that understandeth this? Is there any one,
   think we, in whom the eye-salve of the flesh hath now its effect to the
   discerning in any fashion the brightness of the Divinity? He hath
   spoken, let us speak too; He, because the Word; we, because of the
   Word. And why speak we, howsoever we do it, of the Word? Because we
   were made by the Word after the likeness of the Word. As far then as we
   are capable of, as far as we can be partakers of that ineffableness,
   let us also speak, and let us not be contradicted. For our faith hath
   gone before, so that we may say, "I believed, therefore have I spoken."
   [3760] I speak then that which I believe; whether or no I also see, or
   howsoever I see; He seeth rather; ye cannot see it. But when I shall
   have spoken, whether he who sees what I speak of, believe that I see
   too what I have spoken of, or whether he believe it not, what is that
   to me? Let him only really [3761] see, and let him believe what he will
   of me.

   8. "The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father
   do." Here rises up an error of the Arians; but it rises up that it may
   fall; because it is not humbled, that it may rise. What is it which
   hath set thee [3762] off? Thou wouldest say that the Son is less than
   the Father. For thou hast heard, "The Son can do nothing of Himself,
   but what He seeth the Father do." From this thou wouldest have the Son
   called less; it is this I know, I know it is this hath set thee off;
   believe that He is not less, thou canst not as yet see it, believe,
   this is what I was saying a little while ago. "But how," you will say,
   "am I to believe against His own words"? He saith Himself, "The Son can
   do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do." Attend too to
   that which follows; "For what things soever the Father doeth, the same
   also doeth the Son likewise;" He did not say, "such things," Beloved,
   consider a while, that ye cause not confusion [3763] to yourselves.
   There is need of a tranquil heart, a godly and devout faith, a
   religious earnest attention; attend, not to me the poor vessel, but to
   Him who putteth the bread in the vessel. Attend then a while. For in
   all that I have said above in exhorting you to faith, that the mind
   imbued with faith may be capable of understanding, all that has been
   said has had a pleasing, glad, and easy sound, has cheered your minds,
   ye have followed it, ye have understood what I said. But what I am now
   about to say I hope there are some who will understand; yet I fear that
   all will not understand. And seeing that God hath by the lesson of the
   Gospel proposed to us a subject to speak upon, and we cannot avoid that
   which the Master hath proposed; I fear lest haply they who will not
   understand, who perhaps will be the greater number, should think that I
   have spoken to them in vain; but yet because of those who will
   understand, I do not speak in vain. Let him who understandeth rejoice,
   let him who doth not understand bear it patiently; what he doth not
   understand, let him bear, and that he may understand, let him bear
   delay.

   9. He doth not say then, "What things soever the Father doeth, such
   doeth the Son:" as if the Father doeth some things, and the Son others.
   For it did seem as though He had meant this when He said above, "The
   Son doeth nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do." Mark;
   He did not there either say, "But what He heareth the Father enjoin;"
   but, "what He seeth the Father do." If then we consult the carnal
   understanding, or sense rather, He hath set before Him as it were two
   workmen, [3764] the Father and the Son, the Father working without
   seeing any, the Son working from seeing the Father. This is still a
   carnal view. Nevertheless, in order to understand those things which
   are higher, let us not decline these lower and mean things. First, let
   us set something before our eyes in this way; let us suppose there are
   two workmen, father and son. The father has made a chest, which the son
   could not make, unless he saw the father making it: he keeps his mind
   on the chest which the father has made, and makes another chest like
   it, not the same. I put off for a while the words which follow, and now
   I ask the Arian; "Dost thou understand it in the sense of this
   supposition? Hath the Father done something, which when the Son saw Him
   do, He too hath done something like it? For do the words by which thou
   art perplexed seem to have this meaning?" Now He doth not say, "The Son
   can do nothing of Himself, but what He heareth the Father enjoin." But
   He saith, "The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the
   Father do." See, if thou understand it thus; the Father hath done
   something, and the Son attendeth that He may see what He Himself too
   hath to do; and that, some other thing like that which the Father had
   done. This which the Father hath done, by whom hath He done it? If not
   by the Son, if not by the Word, thou hast incurred the charge of
   blasphemy against the Gospel. "For all things were made by Him." [3765]
   So then what the Father had done, He had done by the Word; if by the
   Word He had done it, He had done it by the Son. Who then is that other
   who attends, that He may do some other thing which he seeth the Father
   do? Ye have not been wont to say that the Father hath two sons: there
   is One, One Only-Begotten of Him. But through His mercy, Alone as
   regards His Divinity and not Alone as regards the inheritance. The
   Father hath made coheirs with His Only Son; not begotten them like Him
   of His Own Substance, but adopted them by Him out of His Own family.
   For "we have been called," as Holy Scripture testifieth, "into the
   adoption of sons." [3766]

   10. What then sayest thou? It is the Only Son Himself That speaketh;
   the Only-Begotten Son speaketh in the Gospel: the Word Himself hath
   given us the words, we have heard Himself saying, "The Son can do
   nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do." Now then the
   Father doeth that the Son may see what to do; and nevertheless the
   Father doeth nothing but by the Son. Assuredly thou art confused, thou
   heretic, assuredly thou art confused; but thy confusion is as from
   taking hellebore, that thou mayest be cured. Even now thou canst not
   find thine own self, thou dost even thyself condemn thine own judgment
   and thy carnal view, I think. Put behind thee the eyes of the flesh,
   raise up what eyes thou hast in thine heart, behold things divine. They
   are men's words it is true thou hearest, and by a man, by the
   Evangelist, by the Gospel thou hearest men's words, as a man; but it is
   of the Word of God thou hearest, that thou mayest hear what is human,
   come to know what is Divine. The Master hath given trouble, that He
   might instruct; hath sown a difficulty, [3767] that He might excite an
   earnest attention. "The Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He
   seeth the Father do." It might follow [3768] that He should say, "For
   what things soever the Father doeth, the like doeth the Son." This He
   doth not say; but, "What things soever the Father doeth, the same doeth
   the Son likewise." The Father doeth not some things, the Son other
   things; because all things that the Father doeth, He doeth by the Son.
   The Son raised Lazarus; did not the Father raise him? [3769] The Son
   gave sight to the blind man; did not the Father give him sight? [3770]
   The Father by the Son in the Holy Ghost. It is the Trinity; but the
   Operation of the Trinity is One, the Majesty One, the Eternity One, the
   Coeternity One, and the Works the Same. The Father doth not create some
   men, the Son others, the Holy Ghost others; the Father and the Son and
   the Holy Ghost create one and the same man; and the Father and the Son
   and the Holy Ghost, One God, createth him.

   11. You observe a Plurality of Persons, but acknowledge the Unity of
   the Divinity. For because of the Plurality of Persons it was said, "Let
   Us make man after Our image and likeness." He did not say, "I will make
   man, and do Thou attend when I am making him, that Thou too mayest be
   able to make another." "Let Us make," He saith; I hear the Plurality;
   "after Our image;" [3771] again I hear the Plurality. Where then is the
   Singularity of the Divinity? Read what follows, "And God made man."
   [3772] It is said, "Let Us make man;" and it is not said, "The Gods
   made man." The Unity is understood in that it was said, "God made man."

   12. Where then is that carnal view? [3773] Be it confounded, hidden,
   brought to nought; let the Word of God speak to us. Even now as godly
   men, as believing already, as already imbued with faith, and having
   gotten some attainment [3774] of understanding, turn we to the Word
   Himself, to the Fountain of light, and let us say together, "O Lord,
   the Father doeth ever the same things as Thou; for that whatsoever the
   Father doeth, by Thee He doeth it. We have heard that Thou art the Word
   in the beginning; [3775] we have not seen, but believed. There too have
   we heard what follows, that all things were made by Thee.' [3776] All
   things then that the Father doeth, He doeth by Thee. Therefore Thou
   doest the same things as the Father. Why then didst Thou wish to say,
   The Son can do nothing of Himself'? For I see a certain equality in
   Thee with the Father, in that I hear, What things soever the Father
   doeth, the same doeth the Son;' I recognise an equality, hereby I
   understand, and comprehend as far as I am able, I and My Father are
   One.' [3777] What meaneth it, that Thou canst do nothing, but what Thou
   seest the Father do? What meaneth this?"

   13. Peradventure He would say to me, yea say to us all: "Now as to this
   that I have said, The Son can do nothing, but what He seeth the Father
   do;' My Seeing' how dost thou understand? My Seeing,' what is it? Put
   aside for a while the form of the servant which He took for thy sake.
   For in that servant's form our Lord had eyes and ears in the Flesh, and
   that human form was the same figure of a Body, such as we bear, the
   same outlines of members. That Flesh had come from Adam: but He was not
   as Adam. So then the Lord walking whether on the earth or in the sea,
   as it pleased Him, as He would, for whatever He would, He could; looked
   at what He would; He fixed His eyes, He saw; He turned away His eyes,
   and did not see; who followed was behind Him, whoso could be seen,
   before Him; with the eyes of His Body, He saw only what was before Him.
   But from His Divinity nothing was hid. Put aside, put aside, I say, for
   a while the form of the servant, look at the Form of God in which He
   was before the world was made; in which He was equal to the Father;
   hereby receive and understand what He saith to thee, Who being in the
   form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God.' [3778] There
   see Him if thou canst, that thou mayest be able to see what His Seeing'
   is." "In the beginning was the Word." How doth the Word see? Hath the
   Word eyes, or are our eyes found in Him, the eyes not of the flesh, but
   the eyes of godly hearts? For, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
   shall see God." [3779]

   14. Christ thou seest Man and God; He doth manifest to thee the Man,
   God He reserveth for thee. Now see how He reserveth God for thee, who
   doth manifest Himself to thee as Man. "Whoso loveth Me," saith He,
   "keepeth My commandments; whoso loveth Me shall be loved of My Father,
   and I will love him." [3780] And as if it were asked, "What wilt Thou
   give to him whom Thou lovest?" "And I will manifest Myself," saith He,
   "to him." What meaneth this, Brethren? He whom they saw already,
   promised that He would manifest Himself to them. To whom? Those by whom
   He was seen, or those also by whom He was not seen? Thus speaking to a
   certain Apostle, who asked to see the Father, that it might suffice
   him, and said, "Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us" [3781] --Then
   He standing before this servant's eyes, in the form of a servant,
   reserving for his eyes when [3782] deified [3783] the Form of God,
   saith to him, "Have I been so long time with you, and have ye not known
   Me? He that seeth Me, seeth the Father also." Thou askest to see the
   Father; see Me, thou seest Me, and dost not see Me. Thou seest what for
   thee I have assumed, thou dost not see What I have reserved for thee.
   Give ear to My commandments, purify thine eyes. "For whoso loveth Me,
   keepeth My commandments, and I will love him." To him as keeping My
   commandments, and by My commandments made whole will I manifest Myself.

   15. If then, Brethren, we are not able to see what the "Seeing" of the
   Word is, whither are we going? what Vision it may be with too great
   haste are we requiring? why are we wishing to have shown us what we are
   not able to see? These things accordingly are spoken of which we desire
   to see, not as what we are able already to comprehend. For if thou
   seest the "Seeing" of the Word, peradventure in that thou seest the
   "Seeing" of the Word, thou wilt see the Word Himself; that the Word may
   not be one thing, the "Seeing" of the Word another, lest there be
   Therein anything joined, and coupled, and double, and compacted. For It
   is something Simple, of a Simplicity ineffable. Not as with a man, the
   man is one thing, the man's seeing another. For sometimes a man's
   seeing is extinguished, and the man remains. This it is of which I said
   that I was about to say something which all would not be able to
   understand; the Lord even grant that some may have understood. My
   Brethren, to this end doth He exhort us, that we may see, that the
   "Seeing" of the Word is beyond our powers; for they are small; be they
   nourished, perfected. Whereby? By the commandments. What commandments?
   "He that loveth Me, keepeth My commandments." [3784] What commandments?
   For already do we wish to increase, to be strengthened, perfected, that
   we may see the "Seeing" of the Word. Tell us, Lord, now what
   commandments? "A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one
   another." [3785] This charity then, Brethren, let us draw from the
   plentifulness of the Fountain, let us receive it; be nourished by it.
   Receive thou [3786] that whereby thou mayest be able to receive. Let
   charity give thee birth, let charity nourish thee; charity bring thee
   to perfection, charity strengthen thee; that thou mayest see this
   "Seeing" of the Word, that the Word is not one thing and His "Seeing"
   another, but that the "Seeing" of the Word is the Very Word Himself;
   and so perhaps thou wilt soon understand that that which is said, "The
   Son can do nothing of Himself, but what He seeth the Father do," is as
   if He had said, "The Son would not be, if He had not been born of the
   Father." Let this suffice, Brethren; I know that I have said that which
   perhaps, if meditated upon, may develop itself to many, which
   oftentimes when expressed in words may chance to be obscured. [3787]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3739] Meritum.

   [3740] Isa. vii. 9, Sept.

   [3741] 2 Pet. i. 19.

   [3742] Substantia; hupostasis.

   [3743] Sperantium, as St Augustin uniformly reads, Tract. 79 and 95, in
   Joh. de pecc. mer. ii. 31. St, Ambrose and St. Jerome have the pass.

   [3744] Heb. xi. i.

   [3745] Vim.

   [3746] Rom. i. 20.

   [3747] Ps. xxxii. 9.

   [3748] Secreta.

   [3749] Publica.

   [3750] Matt. xiv. 21.

   [3751] John ii. 9.

   [3752] Artificem.

   [3753] Ecclus. vi. 37.

   [3754] Ps. xvi. 7, Sept. (xvii. 7, English version).

   [3755] John i. 1.

   [3756] The punctuation of the reprint of the Ben. has been followed,
   "Jamne vides jam, inquam, vides? carnem interrogo, sed carnem ostendo."
   The Ben. pointed, "vides carnem," but noted Locus mendosus. The meaning
   may be, "It is of His Birth in the Flesh that I enquire, but I point
   out the mode of that Birth, i.e. of a Virgin."

   [3757] Ps. xix. 5.

   [3758] John i. 1.

   [3759] John v. 19.

   [3760] Ps. cxvi. 10.

   [3761] Sinceriter.

   [3762] Movit.

   [3763] Strepitum.

   [3764] Artifices.

   [3765] John i. 3.

   [3766] Eph. i. 5.

   [3767] Quæstionem.

   [3768] Consequens.

   [3769] John xi.

   [3770] John ix.

   [3771] Gen. i. 26.

   [3772] Gen. i. 27.

   [3773] Intentio.

   [3774] Merito.

   [3775] John i. 1.

   [3776] John i. 3.

   [3777] John x. 30.

   [3778] Phil. ii. 6.

   [3779] Matt. v. 8.

   [3780] John xiv. 21.

   [3781] John xiv. 8.

   [3782] Deificati.

   [3783] Vid. St. Athanasius, Treatise against Arians, Oxford edit.
   Nicene Def. ch. iii. 12, § 14 and Disc. 1, ch. xi. § 39, p. 336, and
   note c. Vide St. Augustin, Ps. 49, § 2.

   [3784] John xiv. 21.

   [3785] John xiii. 34.

   [3786] Cape per quod sis capax.

   [3787] See Tract. 18 and 20 in Joh.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXVII.

   [CXXVII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John v. 25,"Verily, verily, I say unto you,
   the hour cometh, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
   son of God; and they that hear shall live,"etc.; and on the words of
   the apostle, "things which eye saw not," etc., 1 Cor. ii. 9

   1. Our hope, Brethren, is not of this present time, nor of this world,
   nor in that happiness whereby men are blinded that forget God. This
   ought we above all things to know, and in a Christian heart hold fast,
   that we were not made Christians for the good things of the present
   time, but for something else which God at once promiseth, and man doth
   not yet comprehend. For of this good it is said, "That eye hath not
   seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man,
   what things God hath prepared for them that love Him." [3788] Because
   then this good, so great, so excellent, so ineffable, fell not in with
   man's understanding, it required God's promise. For what hath been
   promised him, man blind of heart doth not now comprehend; nor can it be
   shown to him at present, what he will one day be to whom the promise is
   given. For so an infant child, if he could understand the words of one
   speaking, when himself could neither speak, nor walk, nor do anything,
   but feeble as we see he is, unable to stand, [3789] requiring the
   assistance of others, were able only to understand him who should speak
   to him and tell him, "Lo, as thou seest me walking, working, speaking,
   after a few years thou shall be as I am;" as he considered himself and
   the other, though he would see what was promised; yet considering his
   own feebleness, would not believe, and yet he would see what was
   promised. But with us infants, as it were, lying in this flesh and
   feebleness, that which is promised is at once great and is not seen;
   and so faith is aroused whereby we believe that we do not see that we
   may attain [3790] to see what we believe. Whosoever derideth this
   faith, so as to think that he is not to believe in that he doth not
   see; when that shall come which he believed not, is put to shame: being
   confounded is separated, being separated, is condemned. But whoso shall
   have believed, is put aside at the right hand, and shall stand with
   great confidence and joy among those to whom it shall be said, "Come,
   blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom which hath been prepared for
   you from the beginning of the world." [3791] But the Lord made an end
   when He spake these words, thus, "These shall go into everlasting
   burning, but the righteous into life eternal." [3792] This is the life
   eternal which is promised us.

   2. Because men love to live on this earth, life is promised them; and
   because they exceedingly fear to die, eternal life is promised them.
   What dost thou love? To live. This shalt thou have. What dost thou
   fear? To die. Thou shalt not suffer it. This seemed to be enough for
   human infirmity, that it should be said, "Thou shalt have eternal
   life." This the mind of man can comprehend, by its present condition it
   can in some sort comprehend what is to be. But by the imperfection of
   its present condition how far can it comprehend it? Because he lives,
   and does not wish to die; he loves eternal life, he wishes to live
   always, never to die. But they who shall be tormented in punishments,
   have even a wish to die, and cannot. It is no great thing then to live
   long, or to live for ever; but to live blessedly is a great thing. Let
   us love eternal life, and hereby may we know how greatly we ought to
   labour for eternal life, when we see men who love the present life,
   which lasts but for a time and must be brought to an end, labour so for
   it, that when the fear of death comes, they will do whatever they can,
   not to put away, but to put off death. How does a man labour, when
   death threatens, by flight, by concealment, by giving all he has, and
   redeeming himself, by toil, by endurance of torments and uneasinesses,
   by calling in physicians, and whatever else a man can do? See, how that
   after exhausting all his labour and his means, he is but able to
   contrive to live a little longer; to live always, he is not able. If
   then men strive with so great labour, with so great efforts, so great a
   cost, such earnestness, such watchfulness, such carefulness, that they
   may live a little longer; how should they strive that they may live for
   ever? And if they are called wise, who by all means strive to put off
   death, and live a few days, that they lose not a few days: how foolish
   are they who so live as to lose the day eternal!

   3. This then only can be promised us, that this gift of God may in
   whatever measure be sweet to us, from this which we have at present;
   seeing that it is of His gift we have it, that we live, that we are in
   health. When then eternal life is promised, let us set before our eyes
   a life of such a kind, as to remove from it everything unpleasant which
   we suffer here. For it is easier for us to find what is not there, than
   what is there. Lo, here we live; we shall live there also. Here we are
   in health when we are not sick, and there is no pain in the body; there
   we shall be in health also. And when it is well with us in this life,
   we suffer no scourge; we shall suffer none there also. Suppose then a
   man here below living, in sound health, suffering no scourge; if any
   one were to grant him that he should be for ever so, and that this good
   estate should never cease, how greatly would he rejoice? how greatly be
   transported? how would he not contain himself in joy without pain,
   without torment, without end of life? If God had promised us this only,
   which I have mentioned, which I have just now in such words as I was
   able, described and set forth; at what a price ought it to be purchased
   if it were to be sold, how great a sum ought to be given to buy it?
   Would all that thou hadst suffice, even though thou shouldest possess
   the whole world? And yet it is to be sold; buy it if thou wilt. And be
   not much disquieted for a thing so great, because of the largeness of
   the price. Its price is no more than what thou hast. Now to procure any
   great and precious thing, thou wouldest get ready gold, or silver, or
   money, or any increase of cattle, or fruits, which might be produced in
   thy possessions, to buy this I know not what great and excellent thing,
   whereby to live in this earth happily. Buy this too, if thou wilt. Do
   not look for what thou hast, but for what thou art. The price of this
   thing is thyself. Its price is what thou art thyself. Give thine own
   self, and thou shalt have it. Why art thou troubled? why disquieted?
   What? Art thou going to seek for thine own self, or to buy thyself? Lo,
   give thine own self as thou art, such as thou art to that thing, and
   thou shalt have it. But you will say, "I am wicked, and perhaps it will
   not accept me." By giving thyself to it, thou wilt be good. The giving
   thyself to this faith and promise, this is to be good. And when thou
   shalt be good, thou wilt be the price of this thing; and shalt have,
   not only what I have mentioned, health, safety, life, and life without
   end; thou shalt not only have this, I will take away other things yet.
   There shall there be no weariness, and sleeping; there shall there be
   no hunger, and thirst; there shall there be no growing, and growing
   old; because there shall be no birth either where the numbers remain
   entire. The number that is there is entire; nor is there any need for
   it to be increased, seeing there is no chance of diminution there. Lo,
   how many things have I taken away, and I have not yet said what shall
   be there. Lo, already there is life, and safety; no scourge, no hunger,
   no thirst, no failing, none of these; and yet I have not said, "what
   eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath ascended into the heart of
   man." For if I have said it, it is false that is written, "Eye hath not
   seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it ascended into the heart of man."
   For whence should it ascend into my heart, that I should say "that
   which hath not ascended into the heart of man"? It is believed, and not
   seen; not only not seen, but not even expressed. How then is it
   believed, if it is not expressed? Who believes what he doth not hear?
   But if he hear it that he may believe, it is expressed; if expressed,
   it is thought of; if thought of and expressed, then it entereth into
   the ears of men. And because it would not be expressed if it were not
   thought of, it hath ascended also into the heart of man. Lo, already
   the mere proposing of so great a thing disturbs us, that we cannot put
   it forth clearly in words. Who then can explain the thing itself?

   4. Let us attend to the Gospel; just now the Lord was speaking, and let
   us do what He said. "He that believeth in Me," saith He, "passeth from
   death unto life, and cometh not into judgment. Verily I say unto you,
   that the hour shall come, and now is, when the dead shall hear the
   Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. For as the
   Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life
   in Himself." [3793] By begetting Him He gave it; in that He begat, He
   gave it. For the Son is of the Father, not the Father of the Son; but
   the Father is the Father of the Son, and the Son is the Son of the
   Father. I say the Son is begotten of the Father, not the Father of the
   Son; and the Son was always, always therefore begotten. Who can
   comprehend this "always begotten"? For when any man hears of one
   begotten, it occurs to him; "Therefore there was a time, when he who
   was begotten was not." What say we then? Not so; there was no time
   before the Son, for that "all things were made by Him." [3794] If all
   things were made by Him, times also were made by Him; how could times
   be before the Son, by whom times were made? Take away then all times,
   the Son was with the Father always. If the Son were with the Father
   always, and yet the Son, He was begotten always; if begotten always, He
   who was begotten was always with Him That begat Him.

   5. You will say, "This have I never seen, one begetting, and always
   with him whom he begat; but he that begat came first, and he that was
   begotten followed in time." You say well, "I have never seen this;" for
   this appertains to "that which eye hath not seen." Do you ask how it
   may be expressed? It cannot be expressed; "For the ear hath not heard,
   neither hath it ascended unto the heart of man." Be it believed and
   adored, when we believe, we adore; when we adore, we grow; when we
   grow, we comprehend. For as yet whilst we are in this flesh, as long as
   we are absent from the Lord, we are, with respect to the Holy Angels
   who see these things, infants to be suckled by faith, hereafter to be
   fed by sight. For so saith the Apostle, "As long as we are in the body
   we are absent from the Lord. For we walk by faith, not by sight."
   [3795] We shall some day come to sight, which is thus promised us by
   John in his Epistle; "Dearly beloved, we are the sons of God, and it
   hath not yet appeared what we shall be." [3796] We are the sons of God
   now by grace, by faith, by the Sacrament, by the Blood of Christ, by
   the redemption of the Saviour; "We are the sons of God, and it hath not
   yet appeared what we shall be. We know that when He shall appear, we
   shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is."

   6. Lo, unto the comprehending of what are we being nourished up; lo,
   unto the embracing and the feeding on what are we being nourished up;
   yet so as that that which is fed on is not diminished, and he that
   feedeth is supported. For now food supports us by eating it; but the
   food which is eaten, is diminished; but when we shall begin to feed on
   Righteousness, to feed on Wisdom, to feed on that Food Immortal, we are
   at once supported, and That Food is not diminished. For if the eye
   knows how to feed on light, and yet doth not diminish the light; for
   the light will be no less because it is seen by more; it feeds the eyes
   of more, and yet is as great as it was before: both they are fed, and
   it is not diminished; if God hath granted this to the light which He
   hath made for the eyes of the flesh, what is He Himself, the Light for
   the eyes of the heart? If then any choice [3797] food were praised to
   thee, on which thou wast to dine, thou wouldest prepare the stomach;
   God is praised to thee, prepare the heart.

   7. Behold what thy Lord saith to thee: "The hour shall come," saith He,
   "and now is." "The hour shall come," yea, that very hour, "now is,
   when"--what? "when the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and
   they that shall hear shall live." They then that shall not hear, shall
   not live. What is, "They that shall hear"? They that shall obey. What
   is, "They that shall hear"? They that shall believe and obey, they
   shall live. So then before they believed and obeyed, they lay dead;
   they walked, and were dead. What availed it to them, that they walked,
   being dead? And yet if any among them were to die a bodily death, they
   would run, get ready the grave, wrap him up, carry him out, bury him,
   the dead, the dead; of whom it is said, "Let the dead bury their dead."
   [3798] Such dead as these are in such wise raised by the Word of God,
   as to live in faith. They who were dead in unbelief, are aroused by the
   Word. Of this hour said the Lord, "The hour shall come, and now is."
   For with His Own Word did He raise them that were dead in unbelief; of
   whom the Apostle says, "Arise thou that sleepest, and rise up from the
   dead, and Christ shall give thee light." [3799] This is the
   resurrection of hearts, this is the resurrection of the inner man, this
   is the resurrection of the soul.

   8. But this is not the only resurrection, there remains a resurrection
   of the body also. Whoso riseth again in soul, riseth again in body to
   his blessedness. For in soul all do not rise again; in body all are to
   rise again. In soul, I say, all do not rise again; but they that
   believe and, obey; for, "They that shall hear shall live." But as the
   Apostle says, "All men have not faith." [3800] If then all men have not
   faith, all men do not rise again in soul. When thy hour of the
   resurrection of the body shall come, all shall rise again; be they good
   or bad, all shall rise again. But whoso first riseth again in soul, to
   his blessedness riseth again in body; whoso doth not first rise again
   in soul, riseth again in body to his curse. Whoso riseth again in soul,
   riseth again in body unto life; whoso riseth not again in soul, riseth
   again in body unto punishment. Seeing then that the Lord hath impressed
   upon us this resurrection of souls, unto which we ought all to hasten,
   and to labour that we may live therein, and living persevere even unto
   the end, it remained for Him to impress upon us the resurrection of
   bodies also, which is to be at the end of the world. Now hear how He
   hath impressed this too.

   9. When He had said, "Verily I say unto you, The hour shall come, and
   now is, when the dead," that is, the unbelievers, "shall hear the Voice
   of the Son of God," that is, the Gospel, "and they that shall hear,"
   that is, that shall obey, "shall live," that is, shall be justified,
   and shall be unbelievers no longer; when, I say, He had said this,
   forasmuch as He saw that we had need to be instructed as to the
   resurrection of the flesh also, and were not to be left thus, He went
   on and said, "For as the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given
   to the Son to have life in Himself." This refers to the resurrection of
   souls, to the quickening of souls. Then He added, "And hath given Him
   power to execute judgment also, because He is the Son of Man." This Son
   of God, is Son of Man. For if the Son of God had continued the Son of
   God, and had not been made the Son of Man, He would not have delivered
   the sons of men. He who had made man, was Himself made that which He
   made, that what He made might not perish. But He was in such wise made
   the Son of Man, as to continue the Son of God. For He was made Man by
   assuming that which He was not, not by losing That which He was;
   continuing God, He was made Man. He took thee, He was not consumed in
   thee. As such then came He to us, the Son of God, and Son of Man, the
   Maker and the Made, the Creator and the Created; the Creator of His
   mother, Created of His mother; such came He to us. In respect of His
   being the Son of God, He saith, "The hour shall come, and now is, when
   the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God." He did not say, "Of
   the Son of Man;" for He was impressing the truth, wherein He is equal
   to the Father. "And they that shall hear shall live. For as the Father
   hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in
   Himself;" not by participation, but in our God. But He, the Father,
   hath life in Himself; and He begat such a Son as should have life in
   Himself; not be made a partaker of life, but Himself be Life, of which
   life we should be partakers; that is, should have life in Himself, and
   Himself be Life. But that He should be made the Son of Man, He took
   from us. Son of God in Himself; that He should be the Son of Man, He
   took from us. Son of God of That which is His Own, Son of Man of ours.
   That which is the less, took He from us; That which is the more, gave
   He to us. For thus He died in that He is the Son of Man, not in that He
   is the Son of God. Yet the Son of God died; but He died in respect to
   the flesh, not in respect to "the Word which was made flesh, and dwelt
   among us." [3801] So then in that He died, He died of that which was
   ours; in that we live, we live of That which is His. He could not die
   of That which was His own, nor could we live of that which is our own.
   As God then, as the Only-Begotten, as equal with Him who begat Him, did
   the Lord Jesus impress this upon us, that if we hear, we shall live.

   10. But, saith He, "He hath given Him power to execute judgment also,
   because He is the Son of Man." So then that Form is to come to
   judgment. The Form of Man is to come to judgment; therefore He said,
   "He hath given Him power to execute judgment also, because He is the
   Son of Man." The Judge here shall be the Son of Man; here shall That
   Form judge which was judged. Hear and understand: the Prophet had said
   this already, "They shall look on Him whom they pierced." [3802] That
   Very Form shall they see which they smote with a spear. He shall sit as
   Judge, Who stood at the judge's seat. He shall condemn the real
   criminals, Who was made a criminal falsely. He shall come Himself, That
   Form shall come. This you find in the Gospel too; when before the eyes
   of His disciples He was going into heaven, they stood and looked on,
   and the Angelic voice spake, "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye," etc.
   "This Jesus shall come in like manner as ye see Him going into heaven."
   [3803] What is, "shall come in like manner"? Shall come in this Very
   Form. For "He hath given Him power to execute judgment, because He is
   the Son of Man." Now see on what principle this was behoveful and
   right, that they who were to be judged might see the Judge. For they
   who were to be judged were both good and bad. "But blessed are the pure
   in heart, for they shall see God." [3804] It remained that in the
   Judgment the Form of the servant should be manifested both to good and
   bad, the Form of God be reserved for the good alone.

   11. For what is it that the good are to receive? Behold I am now
   expressing that which I did not express a little above; and yet in
   expressing I do not express it. For I said that there we shall be in
   sound health, shall be safe, shall be living, shall be without
   scourges, without hunger and thirst, without failing, without loss of
   our eyes. All this I said; but what we shall have more, I said not. We
   shall see God. Now this will be so great, yea so great a thing will it
   be, that in comparison of it, all the rest is nothing. I said that we
   shall be living, that we shall be safe and sound, that we shall suffer
   no hunger and thirst, that we shall not fall into weariness, that sleep
   will not oppress us. All this, what is it to that happiness, whereby we
   shall see God? Because then God cannot be now manifested as He is, whom
   nevertheless we shall see; therefore, "what eye hath not seen, nor ear
   heard," [3805] this the good shall see, this shall the godly see, this
   the merciful shall see, this shall the faithful see, this shall they
   see who shall have a good lot in the resurrection of the body, for that
   they have had a good obedience in the resurrection of the heart.

   12. Shall then the wicked man see God too? of whom Isaiah saith, "Let
   the ungodly be taken away, that he see not the Glory of God." [3806]
   Both the ungodly and the godly then shall see that Form; and when the
   sentence, "Let the ungodly be taken away that he see not the Glory of
   God," shall have been pronounced; it remains that as to the godly and
   the good, that be fulfilled which the Lord Himself promised, when He
   was here in the flesh, and seen not by the good only, but by the evil
   also. He spake amongst the good and evil, and was seen of all, as God,
   hidden, as Man, manifested; as God ruling men, as Man appearing among
   men: He spake, I say, among them, and said, "Whoso loveth Me, keepeth
   My commandments; and he that loveth Me, shall be loved of My Father,
   and I will love him." [3807] And as if it were said to Him, And what
   wilt Thou give him? And "I will," He saith, "manifest Myself to him."
   When did He say this? When He was seen by men. When did He say this?
   When He was seen even by them, by whom He was not loved. How then was
   He to manifest Himself to them that loved Him, save in Such a Form, as
   they who loved Him then saw not? Therefore, seeing that the Form of God
   was being reserved, the Form of man manifested; by the Form of man,
   speaking to men, conspicuous and visible, He manifested Himself to all,
   both good and bad, He reserved Himself for them that loved Him.

   13. When is He to manifest Himself to them that love Him? After the
   resurrection of the body, when "the ungodly shall be taken away that he
   see not the Glory of God." For then "when He shall appear, we shall be
   like Him; for we shall see Him as He is." [3808] This is life eternal.
   For all that we said before is nothing to that life. That we live, what
   is it? That we are in health, what is it? That we shall see God, is a
   great thing. This is life eternal; this Himself hath said, "But this is
   life eternal, that they may know Thee the Only True God, and Jesus
   Christ whom Thou hast sent." [3809] This is life eternal, that they may
   know, see, comprehend, acquaint themselves with what they had believed,
   may perceive that which they were not yet able to comprehend. Then may
   the mind see what "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it
   ascended into the heart of man;" this shall be said to them at the end,
   "Come, ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom which hath been
   prepared for you from the beginning of the world." [3810] Those wicked
   ones then shall go into everlasting burning. But the righteous,
   whither? Into life eternal? What is life eternal? "This is life
   eternal, that they may know Thee, the Only True God, and Jesus Christ,
   whom Thou hast sent."

   14. Speaking then of the future resurrection of the body, and not
   leaving us thus, He saith, "He hath given Him power to execute judgment
   also, because He is the Son of Man. Marvel not at this, for the hour
   shall come." He did not add in this place, "and now is;" because this
   hour shall be hereafter, because this hour shall be at the end of the
   world, because this shall be the last hour, shall be at the last trump.
   "Marvel not at this," because I have said, "He hath given Him power to
   execute judgment also, because He is the Son of Man. Marvel not." For
   this reason have I said this, because it behoves Him as Man to be
   judged by men. And what men shall He judge? Those whom He finds alive?
   Not only those, but what? "The hour shall come, when they that are in
   the graves." [3811] How did He express those that are dead in the
   flesh? "They who are in the graves," whose corpses lie buried, whose
   ashes are covered up, whose bones are dispersed, whose flesh is flesh
   no more, and yet is entire to God. "The hour shall come, when all that
   are in the graves shall hear His Voice, and shall come forth." Be they
   good or bad, they shall hear the Voice, and shall come forth. All the
   bands of the grave [3812] shall be burst asunder; all that was lost,
   yea rather was thought to be lost shall be restored. For if God made
   man who was not, can He not re-fashion that which was?

   15. I suppose when it is said, "God shall raise the dead again," no
   incredible thing is said for it is of God, not of man, that it is said.
   It is a great thing which shall be done, yea, an incredible thing that
   shall be done. But let it not be incredible, for see, who It is That
   doeth it. He it is said shall raise thee, Who created thee. Thou wast
   not, and thou art; and once made, shalt thou not be? God forbid thou
   shouldest think so! God did something more marvellous when He made that
   which was not; and nevertheless He did make that which was not; and
   shall it be disbelieved that He is able to re-fashion that which was,
   by those very persons whom He made what they were not? Is this the
   return we make to God, we who were not, and were made? Is this the
   return we make Him, that we will not believe that He is able to raise
   again what He hath made? Is this the return which His creature renders
   Him? "Have I therefore," God saith to thee, "made thee, O man, before
   thou wast, that thou shouldest not believe Me, that thou shalt be what
   thou wast, who hast been able to be what thou wast not?" But you will
   say, "Lo, what I see in the tomb, is dust, ashes, bones; and shall this
   receive life again, skin, substance, flesh, and rise again? what? these
   ashes, these bones, which I see in the tomb?" Well. At least thou seest
   ashes, thou seest bones in the tomb; in thy mother's womb there was
   nothing. This thou seest, ashes at least there are, and bones; before
   that thou wast, there was neither ashes, nor bones; and yet thou wast
   made, when thou wast not at all; and dost thou not believe that these
   bones (for in whatever state, of whatever kind they are, yet they are),
   shall receive the form again which they had, when thou hast received
   what thou hadst not? Believe; for if thou shalt believe this, then
   shall thy soul be raised up. And thy soul shall be raised up "now;"
   "The hour shall come, and now is;" then to thy blessing shall thy flesh
   rise again, "when the hour shall come, that all that are in the graves
   shall hear His Voice, and shall come forth." For thou must not at once
   rejoice, because thou dost hear "and come forth;" hear what follows,
   "They that have done good unto the resurrection of life; but they that
   have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation." [3813] Turning to
   the Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3788] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [3789] Jacentem.

   [3790] Mereamur.

   [3791] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [3792] Matt. xxv. 46.

   [3793] John v. 24-26.

   [3794] John i. 3.

   [3795] 2 Cor. v. 6, 7.

   [3796] 1 John iii. 2.

   [3797] Magnus.

   [3798] Matt. viii. 22.

   [3799] Eph. v. 14.

   [3800] 2 Thess. iii. 2.

   [3801] John i. 14.

   [3802] Zech. xii. 10; John xix. 37.

   [3803] Acts i. 11.

   [3804] Matt. v. 8.

   [3805] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [3806] Isa. xxvi. 10, Sept.

   [3807] John xiv. 21.

   [3808] 1 John iii. 2.

   [3809] John xvii. 3.

   [3810] Matt. xxv. 34.

   [3811] John v. 28.

   [3812] Inferorum.

   [3813] John v. 29.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXVIII.

   [CXXVIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John v. 31,"If I bear witness of myself,"
   etc.; and on the words of the apostle, Galatians v. 16, "Walk by the
   spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh. For the flesh
   lusteth," etc.

   1. We have heard the words of the holy Gospel; and this that the Lord
   Jesus saith, "If I bear witness of Myself, My witness is not true,"
   [3814] may perplex some. How then is not the witness of the Truth true?
   Is it not Himself who hath said, "I am the Way, and the Truth, and the
   Life"? [3815] Whom then are we to believe, if we must not believe the
   Truth? For of a surety he is minded to believe nothing but falsehood,
   who does not choose to believe the truth. So then this was spoken on
   their principles, that you should understand it thus, and gather this
   meaning from these words; "If I bear witness of Myself, My witness is
   not true," that is, as ye think. For He knew well that His Own witness
   of Himself was true; but for the sake of the weak, and hard of belief,
   and without understanding, the Sun looked out for lamps. For their
   weakness of sight could not bear the dazzling brightness of the Sun.

   2. Therefore was John sought for to bear witness to the Truth; and ye
   have heard what He said; "Ye came unto John; he was a burning and a
   shining lamp, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his
   light." [3816] This lamp was prepared for their confusion, for of this
   was it said so long time before in the Psalms, "I have prepared a lamp
   for Mine Anointed." [3817] What! a lamp for the Sun! "His enemies will
   I clothe with confusion: but upon Himself shall my sanctification
   flourish." [3818] And hence they were in a certain place confounded by
   means of this very John, when the Jews said to the Lord, "By what
   authority doest Thou these things? Tell us." To whom He answered, "Do
   ye tell Me too, The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men?"
   They heard, and held their peace. For they thought at once with
   themselves. "If we shall say, Of men: the people will stone us; for
   they hold John as a prophet. If we shall say, From heaven; He will say
   to us, Why then have ye not believed him?" [3819] For John bare witness
   to Christ. So straitened in their hearts by their own questions, and
   taken in their own snares, they answered, "We do not know." What else
   could the voice of darkness be? It is right indeed for a man when he
   does not know, to say, "I know not." But when he does know, and says,
   "I know not;" he is a witness against himself. Now they knew well
   John's excellency, and that his baptism was from heaven; but they were
   unwilling to acquiesce in Him to whom John bare witness. But when they
   said, "We do not know;" Jesus answered them. "Neither will I tell you
   by what authority I do these things." And they were confounded; and so
   was fulfilled, "I have prepared a lamp for Mine Anointed, His enemies
   will I clothe with confusion."

   3. Are not Martyrs witnesses of Christ, and do they not bear witness to
   the truth? But if we think more carefully, when those Martyrs bear
   witness, He beareth witness to Himself. For He dwelleth in the Martyrs,
   that they may bear witness to the truth. Hear one of the Martyrs, even
   the Apostle Paul; "Would ye receive a proof of Christ, who speaketh in
   Me?" [3820] When John then beareth witness, Christ, who dwelleth in
   John, beareth witness to Himself. Let Peter bear witness, let Paul bear
   witness, let the rest of the Apostles bear witness, let Stephen bear
   witness, it is He who dwelleth in them all that beareth witness to
   Himself. For He without them is God, they without Him, what are they?

   4. Of Him it is said, "He ascended up on high, He led captivity
   captive, He gave gifts unto men." [3821] What is, "He led captivity
   captive"? He conquered death. What is, "He led captivity captive"? The
   devil was the author of death, and the devil was himself by the Death
   of Christ led captive. "He ascended up on high." What do we know higher
   than heaven? Visibly and before the eyes of His disciples He ascended
   into heaven. This we know, this we believe, this we confess. "He gave
   gifts unto men." What gifts? The Holy Spirit. He who giveth such a
   Gift, what is He Himself? For great is God's mercy; He giveth a Gift
   equal to Himself; for His Gift is the Holy Spirit, and the Whole
   Trinity, Father and Son and Holy Spirit, is One God. What hath the Holy
   Spirit brought us? Hear the Apostle; "The love of God," saith he, "hath
   been shed abroad in our hearts." [3822] Whence, thou beggar, hath the
   love of God been shed abroad in thine heart? How, or wherein hath the
   love of God been shed abroad in the heart of man? "We have," saith he,
   "this treasure in earthen vessels." Why in earthen vessels? "That the
   excellency of the power may be of God?" [3823] Finally, when he had
   said, "The love of God hath been shed abroad in our hearts;" that no
   man might think that he hath this love of God of himself, he added
   immediately, "By the Holy Spirit, who hath been given to us."
   Therefore, that thou mayest love God, let God dwell in thee, and love
   Himself in thee, that is, to His love let Him move thee, enkindle,
   enlighten, arouse thee.

   5. For in this body of ours there is a struggle; as long as we live, we
   are in combat; as long as we are in combat, we are in peril; but, "in
   all these things we are conquerors through Him who loved us." [3824]
   Our combat ye heard of just now when the Apostle was being read. "All
   the law," saith he, "is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shalt
   love thy neighbour as thyself." [3825] This love is from the Holy
   Spirit. "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." First see, if thou
   knowest yet how to love thyself; and then will I commit to thee the
   neighbour whom thou art to love as thyself. But if thou dost not yet
   know how to love thyself; I fear lest thou shouldest deceive thy
   neighbour as thyself. For if thou lovest iniquity, thou dost not love
   thyself. The Psalm is witness; "But whoso loveth iniquity, hateth his
   own soul." [3826] Now if thou hate thine own soul, what doth it profit
   thee that thou dost love thy flesh? If thou hate thine own soul and
   lovest thy flesh, thy flesh shall rise again; but only that thy soul
   may be tormented. Therefore the soul must first be loved, which is to
   be subdued unto God, that this service may maintain its due order, the
   soul to God, the flesh to the soul. Wouldest thou that thy flesh should
   serve thy soul? Let thy soul serve God. Thou oughtest to be ruled, that
   thou mayest be able to rule. For so perilous is this struggle, that if
   thy Ruler forsake thee, ruin must ensue.

   6. What struggle? "But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed
   that ye be not consumed one of another. But I say, Walk in the Spirit."
   [3827] I am quoting the words of the Apostle, which have been just read
   out of his Epistle. "But I say, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not
   fulfil the lusts of the flesh." "But I say, Walk in the Spirit, and the
   lusts of the flesh," he did not say, "Ye shall not have;" nor did he
   say, "Ye shall not do;" but, "Ye shall not fulfil." Now what this is,
   with the Lord's assistance, I will declare as I shall be able; give
   attention, that ye may understand, if ye are walking in the Spirit.
   "But I say, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lusts of
   the flesh." Let him follow on; if haply anything, as this which is here
   obscure, may be understood more easily by the sequel of his words. For
   I said, that it was not without a meaning that the Apostle would not
   say, "Ye shall not have the lusts of the flesh;" nor again would even
   say," Ye shall not do the lusts of the flesh;" but said, "Ye shall not
   fulfil the lusts of the flesh." He hath set forth this struggle before
   us. In this battle are we occupied, if we are in [3828] God's service.
   What then follows? "For the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the
   spirit against the flesh. For these are contrary the one to the other,
   so that ye do not the things that ye would." [3829] This, if it be not
   understood, is with exceeding peril heard. And therefore anxious as I
   am lest men by an evil interpretation should perish, I have undertaken
   with the Lord's assistance to explain these words to your affection. We
   have leisure enough, we have begun early in the morning, the hour of
   dinner does not press; on this day, the sabbath that is, they that
   hunger after the word of God are wont especially to meet together. Hear
   and attend, I will speak with what carefulness I can.

   7. What then is that which I said, "Is heard with peril if it be not
   understood"? Many overcome by carnal and damnable lusts, commit all
   sorts of crimes and impurities, and wallow in such abominable
   uncleanness, as it is a shame even to mention; and say to themselves
   these words of the Apostle. See what the Apostle has said, "So that we
   cannot do the things that ye would." [3830] I would not do them, I am
   forced, I am compelled, I am overcome, "I do the things that I would
   not," [3831] as the Apostle says. "The flesh lusteth against the
   Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, so that ye cannot do the
   things that ye would." You see with what peril this is heard, if it be
   not understood. You see how it concerns the pastor's office, to open
   the closed fountains, and to minister to the thirsty sheep the pure,
   harmless water.

   8. Be not willing then to be overcome when thou fightest. See what kind
   of war, what kind of battle, what kind of strife he hath set forth,
   within, within thine own self. "The flesh lusteth against the Spirit."
   If the Spirit lust not also against the flesh, commit adultery. But if
   the Spirit lust against the flesh, I see a struggle, I do not see a
   victory, it is a contest. "The flesh lusteth against the Spirit."
   Adultery has its pleasure. I confess that it has its pleasure. But,
   "The Spirit lusteth against the flesh:" Chastity too has its pleasure.
   Therefore let the Spirit overcome the flesh; or by all means not be
   overcome by the flesh. Adultery seeks the darkness, chastity desires
   the light. As thou wouldest wish to appear to others, so live; as thou
   wouldest wish to appear to men, even when beyond the eyes of men so
   live; for He who made thee, even in the darkness seeth thee. Why is
   chastity praised publicly by all? Why do not even adulterers praise
   adultery? "Whoso" then "seeketh the truth, cometh to the light." [3832]
   But adultery has its pleasure. Be it contradicted, resisted, opposed.
   For it is not so that thou hast nothing wherewith to fight. Thy God is
   in thee, the good Spirit hath been given to thee. And notwithstanding
   this flesh of ours is permitted to lust against the spirit by evil
   suggestions and real [3833] delights. Be that secured which the Apostle
   saith, "Let not sin reign in your mortal body." [3834] He did not say,
   "Let it not be there." It is there already. And this is called sin,
   because it has befallen us through the wages [3835] of sin. For in
   Paradise the flesh did not lust against the spirit, nor was there this
   struggle there, where was peace only; but after the transgression,
   after that man was loth to serve God and was given up to himself; yet
   not so given up to himself as that he could so much as possess himself;
   but possessed by him, by whom deceived; the flesh began to lust against
   the Spirit. Now it is in the good that it lusteth against the Spirit;
   for in the bad it has nothing to lust against. For there doth it lust
   against the Spirit, where the Spirit is.

   9. For when he says, "The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the
   Spirit against the flesh;" do not suppose that so much hath been
   attributed to the spirit of man. It is the Spirit of God who fighteth
   in thee against thyself, against that which in thee is against thee.
   For thou wouldest not stand to Godward; thou didst fall, wast broken;
   as a vessel when it falls from a man's hand to the ground, wast thou
   broken. And because thou wast broken, therefore art thou turned against
   thyself; therefore art thou contrary to thine own self. Let there be
   nought in thee contrary to thyself, and thou shalt stand in thine
   integrity. For that thou mayest know that this office appertaineth to
   the Holy Spirit; the Apostle saith in another place, "For if ye live
   after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do mortify
   the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live." [3836] From these words man was
   at once uplifting himself, as though by his own spirit he were able to
   mortify the deeds of the flesh. "If ye live after the flesh, ye shall
   die; but if through the Spirit ye do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye
   shall live." Explain to us, Apostle, through what spirit? For man also
   hath a spirit appertaining to his proper nature, whereby he is man. For
   man consists of body and spirit. And of this spirit of man it is said,
   "No man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in
   him." [3837] I see then that man himself hath his own spirit
   appertaining to his proper nature, and I hear thee saying, "But if
   through the Spirit ye do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall
   live." I ask, through what spirit; my own, or God's? For I hear thy
   words, and am still perplexed by this ambiguity. For when the word
   "spirit" is used, it is used sometimes of the spirit of a man, and of
   cattle, as it is written, that "all flesh which had in itself the
   spirit of life, died by the flood." [3838] And so the word spirit is
   spoken of cattle, and spoken of man too. Sometimes even the wind is
   called spirit; as it is in the Psalm, "Fire, hail, snow, frost, the
   spirit of the tempest." [3839] For as much then as the word "spirit" is
   used in many ways, by what spirit, O Apostle, hast thou said that the
   deeds of the flesh are to be mortified; by mine own, or by the Spirit
   of God? Hear what follows, and understand. The difficulty is removed by
   the following words. For when he had said, "But if through the Spirit
   ye mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live;" [3840] he added
   immediately, "For as many as are acted [3841] upon by the Spirit of
   God, they are the sons of God." Thou dost act, if thou art acted upon,
   and actest well, if thou art acted upon by the Good. So then when he
   said to thee, "If through the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the flesh,
   ye shall live;" and it was doubtful with thee of what spirit he had
   spoken, in the words following understand the Master, acknowledge the
   Redeemer. For That Redeemer hath given thee the Spirit Whereby thou
   mayest mortify the deeds of the flesh. "For as many as are acted upon
   by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." They are not the sons
   of God if they are not acted upon by the Spirit of God. But if they are
   acted upon by the Spirit of God, they fight; because they have a mighty
   Helper. For God doth not look on at our combattings as the people do at
   the gladiators. [3842] The people may favour the gladiator, help him
   they cannot when he is in peril.

   10. So then here to; "The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the
   Spirit against the flesh." And what means, "So that ye cannot do the
   things that ye would"? For here is the peril with one who understands
   it amiss. Be it now my office to explain it, howsoever incompetent. "So
   that ye cannot do the things that ye would." Attend, ye holy ones,
   whosoever ye are that are fighting. To them that are battling do I
   speak. They who are fighting, understand; he that is not fighting,
   understands me not. Yea, he that is fighting, I will not say
   understands me, but anticipates me. What is the chaste man's wish? That
   no lust should rise up in his members at all opposed to chastity. He
   wisheth for peace, but as yet he hath it not. For when we shall have
   come to that state, where there shall rise up no lust at all to be
   opposed, there will be no enemy for us to struggle with; nor is victory
   a matter for expectation there, for that there is triumphing over the
   now vanquished foe. Hear of this victory, in the Apostle's own words;
   "This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
   immortality. Now when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption,
   and this mortal shall have put on immortality; then shall be brought to
   pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory."
   Hear the voices of them that triumph; "O death, where is thy
   contention? O death, where is thy sting?" [3843] Thou hast smitten,
   thou hast wounded, thou hast thrown down; but He hath been wounded for
   me who made me. O death, death, He who made me hath been wounded for
   me, and by His Death hath overcome thee. And then in triumph shall they
   say, "O death, where is thy contention? O death, where is thy sting?"

   11. But now, when "the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit
   against the flesh," is the contention of death; we do not what we
   would. Why? Because we would that there should be no lusts, but we
   cannot hinder it. Whether we will or not, we have them; whether we will
   or not, they solicit, [3844] they allure, they sting, they disturb us,
   they will be rising. They are repressed, not yet extinguished. How long
   does the flesh lust against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
   flesh? Will it be so, even when the man is dead? God forbid! Thou
   puttest off the flesh, how then shall thou draw the lusts of the flesh
   along with thee? Nay, if thou hast fought well, thou shall be received
   into rest. And from this rest, thou passest to be crowned, not
   condemned; that thou mayest after it be brought to the Kingdom. As long
   then as we live here, my brethren, so it is; so is it with us even who
   have grown old in this warfare, less mighty enemies it is true we have,
   but yet we have them. Our enemies are in a measure wearied out even now
   by age; but nevertheless, wearied though they be, they do not cease to
   harass by such excitements as they can the quiet of old age. Sharper is
   the fight of the young; we know it well, we have passed through it:
   "The flesh" then "lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
   the flesh; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would." For what
   would ye, O holy men, and good warriors, and brave soldiers of Christ?
   what would ye? That there should be no evil lusts at all. But ye cannot
   help it. Sustain [3845] the war, hope for triumph. For now in the
   meanwhile ye must fight. "The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the
   Spirit against the flesh; so that ye cannot do the things that ye
   would;" that is, that there should be no lusts of the flesh at all.

   12. But do what ye are able; what the Apostle himself says in another
   place, which I had already begun to repeat; "Let not sin reign in your
   mortal body, to obey the desires thereof." [3846] Lo, what I would not;
   evil desires arise; but obey them not. Arm thyself, assume the weapons
   of war. The precepts of God are thy arms. If thou listen to me as thou
   shouldest, thou art armed even by that which I am speaking. "Let not
   sin,' he says, reign in your mortal body.' For as long as ye bear a
   mortal body, sin doth fight against you; but let it not reign." What
   is, "Let it not reign"? That is, "to obey the desires thereof." If ye
   begin to obey, it reigns. And what is it to obey, but to "yield your
   members as instruments of iniquity unto sin"? Nothing more excellent
   than this teacher. What wouldest thou that I should yet explain to
   thee? Do what thou hast heard. Yield not thy members instruments of
   iniquity unto sin. God hath given thee power by His Spirit to restrain
   thy members. Lust riseth up, restrain thy members; what can it do now
   that it hath risen? Restrain thou thy members; yield not thy members
   instruments of iniquity unto sin; arm not thine adversary against
   thyself. Restrain thy feet, that they go not after unlawful things.
   Lust hath risen up, restrain thy members; restrain thine hands from all
   wickedness; restrain the eyes, that they wander not astray; restrain
   the ears, that they hear not the words of lust with pleasure; restrain
   the whole body, restrain the sides, restrain its highest and lowest
   parts. What can lust do? How to rise up, it knoweth. How to conquer, it
   knoweth not. By rising up constantly without effect, it learns not even
   to rise.

   13. Let us then return to the words, which I had set forth out of the
   Apostle as obscure, and we shall now see them to be plain. For this I
   had set forth, that the Apostle did not say, "Walk in the Spirit, and
   ye shall not have the lusts of the flesh;" because we must necessarily
   have them. Why then did he not say, "Ye shall not do the lusts of the
   flesh"? Because we do them; for we do lust. The very lusting, is doing.
   But the Apostle says, "Now it is no more I that do it, but sin that
   dwelleth in me." [3847] What then hast thou to beware of? This
   doubtless, that thou fulfil them not. A damnable lust hath risen up, it
   hath risen, made its suggestion; let it not be heard. It burneth, and
   is not quieted, and thou wouldest that it should not burn. Where then
   is, "So that ye cannot do the things that ye would"? Do not give it thy
   members. Let it burn without effect, and it will spend itself. In thee
   then these lusts are done. It must be confessed, they are done. And
   therefore he said, "Ye shall not fulfil." Let them not then be
   fulfilled. Thou hast determined to do, thou hast fulfilled. For thou
   hast fulfilled it, if thou determinest upon committing adultery, and
   dost not commit it, because no place hath been found, because no
   opportunity is given, because, it may be, she for whom thou seemest to
   be disturbed is chaste; lo, now she is chaste, and thou art an
   adulterer. Why? Because thou hast fulfilled lusts. What is, "hast
   fulfilled"? Hast determined in thy mind upon committing adultery. If
   now, which God forbid, thy members too have wrought, thou hast fallen
   down headlong into death.

   14. Christ raised up the daughter of the ruler of the synagogue who was
   dead in the house. [3848] She was in the house, she had not yet been
   carried out. So is the man who hath determined on some wickedness in
   his heart; he is dead, but he lies within. But if he has come as far as
   to the action of the members, he has been carried out of the house. But
   the Lord raised also the young man, the widow's son, when he was being
   carried out dead beyond the gate of the city. [3849] So then I venture
   to say, Thou hast determined in thine heart, if thou call thyself back
   from thy deed, thou wilt be cured before thou put it into action. For
   if thou repent in thine heart, that thou hast determined on some bad
   and wicked and abominable and damnable thing; there where thou wast
   lying dead, within, so within hast thou arisen. But if thou have
   fulfilled, now hast thou been carried out; but thou hast One to say to
   thee, "Young man, I say unto thee, Arise." Even though thou have
   perpetrated it, repent thee, return at once, come not to the sepulchre.
   But even here I find a third one dead, who was brought even to the
   sepulchre. He has now upon him the weight of habit, a mass of earth
   presses him down exceedingly. For he has been practised much in unclean
   deeds, and is weighed down exceedingly by his immoderate [3850] habit.
   Here too Christ crieth, "Lazarus, come forth." [3851] For a man of very
   evil habit "now stinketh." With good reason did Christ in that case cry
   out; and not cry out only, but with a loud Voice cried out. For at
   Christ's Cry even such as these, dead though they be, buried though
   they be, stinking though they be, yet even these shall rise again, they
   shall rise again. For of none that lieth dead need we despair under
   such a Raiser up. Turn we to the Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3814] John v. 31.

   [3815] John xiv. 6.

   [3816] John v. 33, 35.

   [3817] Ps. cxxxii. 17.

   [3818] Ps. cxxxii. 18, Sept.

   [3819] Luke xx. 2, etc.

   [3820] 2 Cor. xiii. 3, Vulgate.

   [3821] Ps. lxviii. 18; Eph. iv. 8.

   [3822] Rom. v. 5.

   [3823] 2 Cor. iv. 7.

   [3824] Rom. viii. 37.

   [3825] Gal. v. 14.

   [3826] Ps. x. 5, Sept. (xi. 5, English version).

   [3827] Gal. v. 15, 16.

   [3828] Deo militamus.

   [3829] Gal. v. 17.

   [3830] Gal. v. 17.

   [3831] Rom. vii. 19.

   [3832] John iii. 21.

   [3833] Genuinis.

   [3834] Rom. vi. 12.

   [3835] Merito.

   [3836] Rom. viii. 13.

   [3837] 1 Cor. ii. 11.

   [3838] Gen. vi. 17 and vii. 22.

   [3839] Ps. cxlvii. 8, Sept. (cxlviii. 8, English version).

   [3840] Rom. viii. 13.

   [3841] Aguntur.

   [3842] Venatores.

   [3843] 1 Cor. xv. 53, etc.

   [3844] Titillant.

   [3845] Exercete.

   [3846] Rom. vi. 12.

   [3847] Rom. vii. 17.

   [3848] Mark v. 35. Vid. Serm. xlviii. (Ben. xcviii.).

   [3849] Luke vii. 12, etc.

   [3850] Nimiâ.

   [3851] John xi. 43.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXIX.

   [CXXIX. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John v. 39, "Ye search the Scriptures,
   because ye think that in them ye have eternal life," etc. Against the
   Donatists.

   1. Give heed, Beloved, to the lesson of the Gospel which has just
   sounded in our ears, whilst I speak a few words as God shall vouchsafe
   to me. The Lord Jesus was speaking to the Jews, and said to them,
   "Search the Scriptures, in which ye think ye have eternal life, they
   testify of me." [3852] Then a little after He said, "I am come in My
   Father's Name, and ye have not received Me; if another shall come in
   his own name, him ye will receive." [3853] Then a little after; "How
   can ye believe, who look for glory one from another, and seek not the
   glory which is of God only?" [3854] At last He saith, "I do not accuse
   you to the Father; there is one that accuseth you, Moses, in whom ye
   trust. For had ye believed Moses, ye would haply believe Me also, for
   he wrote of Me. But seeing ye believe not his words, how can ye believe
   Me?" [3855] At these sayings which have been set before us from divine
   [3856] inspiration, out of the reader's mouth, but by the Saviour's
   ministry, give ear to a few words, not to be estimated by their number,
   but to be duly weighed.

   2. For all these things it is easy to understand as touching the Jews.
   But we must beware, lest, when we give too much attention to them, we
   withdraw our eyes from ourselves. For the Lord was speaking to His
   disciples; and assuredly what He spake to them, He spake to us too
   their posterity. Nor to them only does what He said, "Lo, I am with you
   alway even unto the end of the world," [3857] apply, but even to all
   Christians that should be after them, and succeed them even unto the
   end of the world. Speaking then to them He said, "Beware of the leaven
   of the Pharisees." [3858] They at that time thought that the Lord had
   said this, because they had brought no bread; they did not understand
   that "Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees" meant, "beware of the
   doctrine of the Pharisees." What was the doctrine of the Pharisees, but
   that which ye have now heard? "Seeking glory one of another, looking
   for glory one from another, and not seeking the glory which is of God
   only." Of these the Apostle Paul thus speaks; "I bear them record that
   they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge." [3859] "They
   have," he says, "a zeal of God;" I know it, I am sure of it; I was once
   among them, I was such as they. "They have," he says, "a zeal of God,
   but not according to knowledge." What is this, O Apostle, "not
   according to knowledge"? Explain to us what the knowledge is thou dost
   set forth, which thou dost grieve is not in them, and wouldest should
   be in us? He went on and subjoined and developed what he had set forth
   closed. What is, "They have a zeal of God, but not according to
   knowledge? For they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and wishing
   to establish their own, have not submitted themselves into the
   righteousness of God." [3860] To be ignorant then of God's
   righteousness, and to wish to establish one's own, this is to "look for
   glory one from another, and not to seek the glory which is of God
   only." This is the leaven of the Pharisees. Of this the Lord bids
   beware. If it is servants that He bids, and the Lord that bids, let us
   beware; lest we hear, "Why say ye to Me, Lord, Lord, and do not the
   things which I say?" [3861]

   3. Let us then leave a while the Jews to whom the Lord was then
   speaking. They are without, they will not listen to us, they hate the
   Gospel itself, they procured false witness against the Lord, that they
   might condemn Him when alive; other witness they bought with money
   against Him when dead. When we say to them, "Believe on Jesus," they
   answer us, "Are we to believe on a dead man?" But when we add, "But He
   rose again;" they answer, "Not [3862] at all;" His disciples stole Him
   away from the sepulchre. The Jewish buyers love falsehood and despise
   the truth of the Lord, the Redeemer. What thou art saying, O Jew, thy
   parents bought for money; and this which they bought hath continued in
   thee. Give heed rather to Him That bought thee, not to him who bought a
   lie for thee.

   4. But as I have said, let us leave these, and attend rather to these
   our brethren, with whom we have to do. For Christ is the Head of the
   Body. The Head is in Heaven, the Body is on earth; the Head is the
   Lord, the Body His Church. But ye remember it is said, "They shall be
   two in one flesh." "This is a great mystery," [3863] says the Apostle,
   "but I speak in Christ and in the Church." [3864] If then they are two
   in one flesh, they are two in one voice. Our Head the Lord Christ spake
   to the Jews these things which we heard, when the Gospel was being
   read, The Head to His enemies; let the Body too, that is, the Church,
   speak to its enemies. Ye know to whom it should speak. What has it to
   say? It is not of myself that I have said, that the voice is one;
   because the flesh is one, the voice is one. Let us then say this to
   them; I am speaking with the voice of the Church. "O Brethren,
   dispersed children, wandering sheep, branches cut off, why do ye
   calumniate me? Why do ye not acknowledge me? "Search the Scriptures, in
   which ye think ye have eternal life, they testify of me;" to the Jews
   our Head saith, what the Body saith to you; "Ye shall seek me, and
   shall not find me." [3865] Why? Because ye do not "search the
   Scriptures, which testify of me."

   5. A testimony for the Head; "To Abraham and his seed were the promises
   made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many, but as of one, And to thy
   seed, which is Christ." [3866] A testimony for the body unto Abraham,
   which the Apostle hath brought forward. "To Abraham were the promises
   made. As I live, saith the Lord, I swear by Myself, because thou hast
   obeyed My Voice, and hast not spared thine own beloved son for Me, that
   in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy
   seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand of the sea, and in thy
   seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed." [3867] Thou hast here
   a testimony for the Head, and one for the Body. Hear another, short,
   and almost in one sentence including a testimony for the Head and for
   the Body. The Psalm was speaking of the Resurrection of Christ; "Be
   Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens." [3868] And immediately for the
   Body; "And Thy glory above all the earth." Hear a testimony for the
   Head; "They digged My Hands and My Feet, they numbered all My Bones;
   and they looked and stared upon Me; they divided My garments among
   them, and cast lots upon My vesture." [3869] Hear immediately a
   testimony for the Body, a few words after, "All the ends of the world
   shall remember themselves and be turned unto the Lord, and all the
   kindreds of the nations shall worship in His sight; for the kingdom is
   the Lord's, and He shall have dominion over the nations." [3870] Hear
   for the Head; And "He is as a bridegroom coming forth out of His
   bride-chamber." [3871] And in this same Psalm hear for the Body; "Their
   sound went out into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
   world." [3872]

   6. These passages are for the Jews, and for these of our own brethren.
   Why so? Because these Scriptures of the Old Testament both the Jews
   receive, and these our brethren receive. But Christ Himself, whom the
   others do not receive, let us see if these last receive. Let Him speak
   Himself, speak both for Himself who is the Head, and for His Body which
   is the Church; for so in us the head speaks for the body. Hear for the
   Head; He was risen from the dead, He found the disciples hesitating,
   doubting, not believing for joy; He "opened their understanding that
   they might understand the Scriptures, and said to them, Thus it is
   written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from
   the dead the third day." Thus for the Head; let Him speak for the Body
   too; "And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in
   His Name throughout all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." [3873] Let
   the Church then speak to her enemies, let her speak. She does speak
   clearly, she is not silent: only let them give ear. Brethren, ye have
   heard the testimonies, now acknowledge me. "Search the Scriptures, in
   which ye hope ye have eternal life: they testify of me." What I have
   said is not of mine own, but of my Lord's; and notwithstanding, ye
   still turn away, still turn your backs. "How can ye believe me, who
   look for glory one from another, and seek not the glory which is of God
   only? For being ignorant of God's righteousness, ye have a zeal of God,
   but not according to knowledge. For being ignorant of God's
   righteousness, and wishing to establish your own, ye have not submitted
   yourselves to the righteousness of God." [3874] What else is it to be
   ignorant of God's righteousness, and to wish to establish your own, but
   to say, "It is I who sanctify, it is I who justify; what I may have
   given is holy"? Leave to God what is God's; recognise, O man, what is
   man's. Thou art ignorant of God's righteousness, and wishest to
   establish thine own. Thou dost wish to justify me; it is enough for
   thee that thou be justified with me.

   7. It is said of Antichrist, and all understand of him what the Lord
   said, "I am come in My Father's Name, and ye have not received Me; if
   another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive." [3875] But
   let us hear John too; "Ye have heard that Antichrist cometh, and even
   now are there many Antichrists." [3876] What is it in Antichrist that
   we are in horror of, but that he is to honour his own name, and to
   despise the Name of the Lord? What else doeth he that saith, "It is I
   that justify"? We answer him, "I came to Christ, not with my feet, but
   with my heart I came; where I heard the Gospel, there did I believe,
   there was I baptized; because I believed on Christ, I believed on God."
   Yet says he, "Thou art not clean." "Why?" "Because I was not there."
   "Tell me why am not I cleansed, a man who was baptized in Jerusalem,
   who was baptized, for instance, among the Ephesians, to whom an Epistle
   you read was written, and whose peace you despise? Lo, to the Ephesians
   the Apostle wrote; a Church was founded, and remains even to this day;
   yea, remains in greater fruitfulness, remains in greater numbers, holds
   fast that which it received of the Apostle, If any man preach ought to
   you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.' [3877] What now?
   what dost thou say to me? Am I not clean? There was I baptized, am I
   not clean?" "No, even thou art not." "Why?" "Because I was not there."
   "But He who is everywhere was there. He who is everywhere was there, in
   whose Name I believed. Thou coming I know not whence, yea, rather not
   coming, but wishing that I should come to thee, fixed in this place,
   sayest to me, Thou wast not baptized duly, seeing I was not there.'
   Consider who was there. What was said to John? Upon whom thou shall see
   the Spirit descending like a dove, this is He which baptizeth.' [3878]
   Him hast thou seeking for thee; nay, for that thou hast grudged me who
   was baptized by Him, thou hast lost Him rather."

   8. Understand then, my Brethren, our language and theirs, and look
   which ye would choose. This is what we say; "Be we holy, God knoweth
   it; be we unrighteous, this again He knoweth better; place not your
   hope in us, whatsoever we be. If we be good, do as is written, Be ye
   imitators of me, as I also am of Christ.' [3879] But if we be bad, not
   even thus are ye abandoned, not even thus have ye remained without
   counsel: give ear to Him, saying, Do what they say; but do not what
   they do.'" [3880] Whereas they on the contrary say, "If we were not
   good, ye were lost." Lo, here is "another that shall come in his own
   name." Shall my life then depend on thee, and my salvation be tied up
   in thee? Have I so forgotten my foundation? Was not Christ the Rock?
   [3881] Is it not that he that buildeth upon the rock, neither the wind
   nor the floods overthrow him? [3882] Come then, if thou wilt, with me
   upon the Rock, and do not wish to be to me for the rock.

   9. Let the Church then say those last words also, "If ye had believed
   Moses, ye would believe me also; for he wrote of me;" [3883] for that I
   am His body of whom he wrote. And of the Church did Moses write. For I
   have quoted the words of Moses "In thy seed shall all nations of the
   earth be blessed." [3884] Moses wrote this in the first book. If ye
   believed Moses, ye would also believe Christ. Because ye despise Moses'
   words, it must needs be that ye despise the words of Christ. "They
   have" there, saith He, "Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.
   Nay, father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead," him they
   will hear. "And He said, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
   neither will they believe, if one rise again from the dead." [3885]
   This was said of the Jews: was it therefore not said of heretics? He
   had risen from the dead, who said, "It behoved Christ to suffer, and to
   rise again from the dead the third day." This I believe. I believe it,
   he says. Dost thou believe? Wherefore believest thou not what follows?
   In that thou believest, "It behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again
   from the dead the third day;" this was spoken of the Head; believe also
   that which follows concerning the Church, "That repentance and
   remission of sins should be preached throughout all nations." [3886]
   Wherefore dost thou believe as touching the Head, and believest not as
   touching the Body? What hath the Church done to thee, that thou
   wouldest so to say behead her? Thou wouldest take away the Church's
   Head, and believe the Head, leave the Body as it were a lifeless trunk.
   It is all to no purpose that thou dost caress the Head, like any
   devoted servant. He that would take off the head, doth his best to kill
   both the head and the body. They are ashamed to deny Christ, yet are
   they not ashamed to deny Christ's words. Christ neither we nor ye have
   seen with our eyes. The Jews saw, and slew Him. We have not seen Him,
   and believe; His words are with us. Compare yourselves with the Jews:
   they despised Him hanging upon the Tree, ye despise Him sitting in
   heaven; at their suggestion Christ's title was set [3887] up, by your
   setting [3888] yourselves up, Christ's Baptism is effaced. But what
   remains, Brethren, but that we pray even for the proud, that we pray
   even for the puffed up, who so extol themselves? Let us say to God on
   their behalf, "Let them know that the Lord is Thy Name; and" not "that"
   men, but "Thou Only art the Most High over all the earth." [3889] Let
   us turn to the Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3852] John v. 39.

   [3853] John v. 43.

   [3854] John v. 44.

   [3855] John v. 45-47.

   [3856] Divinitus.

   [3857] Matt. xxviii. 20.

   [3858] Matt. xvi. 6.

   [3859] Rom. x. 2.

   [3860] Rom. x. 3.

   [3861] Matt. vii. 21; Luke vi. 46.

   [3862] Absit.

   [3863] Sacramentum.

   [3864] Eph. v. 31, 32.

   [3865] John vii. 36.

   [3866] Gal. iii. 16.

   [3867] Gen. xxii. 16, etc.

   [3868] Ps. lvii. 11.

   [3869] Ps. xxi. 17-19, Sept. (xxii. 16-18, English version).

   [3870] Ps. xxi. 28, 29, Sept. (xxii. 27, 28, English version).

   [3871] Ps. xix. 5.

   [3872] Ps. xix. 4.

   [3873] Luke xxiv. 45-47.

   [3874] Rom. x. 2, 3.

   [3875] John v. 43.

   [3876] 1 John ii. 18.

   [3877] Gal. i. 9.

   [3878] John i. 33.

   [3879] 1 Cor. iv. 16, xi. 1.

   [3880] Matt. xxiii. 3.

   [3881] 1 Cor. x. 4.

   [3882] Matt. vii. 25.

   [3883] John v. 46.

   [3884] Gen. xxii. 18.

   [3885] Luke xvi. 29-31.

   [3886] Luke xxiv. 46, etc.

   [3887] Stetit.

   [3888] Stantibus.

   [3889] Ps. lxxxii. 19, Sept. (lxxxiii. 18, English version).
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXX.

   [CXXX. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John vi. 9, where the miracle of the five
   loaves and the two fishes is related.

   1. It was a great miracle that was wrought, dearly beloved, for five
   thousand men to be filled with five loaves and two fishes, and the
   remnants of the fragments to fill twelve baskets. A great miracle: but
   we shall not wonder much at what was done, if we give heed to Him That
   did it. He multiplied the five loaves in the hands of them that brake
   them, who multiplieth the seeds that grow in the earth, so as that a
   few grains are sown, and whole barns are filled. But, because he doth
   this every year, no one marvels. Not the inconsiderableness [3890] of
   what is done, but its constancy takes away admiration of it. But when
   the Lord did these things, He spake to them that had understanding, not
   by words only, but even by the miracles themselves. The five loaves
   signified the five books of Moses' Law. The old Law is barley compared
   to the Gospel wheat. In those books are great mysteries concerning
   Christ contained. Whence He saith Himself, "If ye had believed Moses,
   ye would believe Me also; for he wrote of Me." [3891] But as in barley
   the marrow is hid under the chaff, so in the veil of the mysteries of
   the Law is Christ hidden. As those mysteries of the Law are developed
   and unfolded; so too those loaves increased when they were broken. And
   in this that I have explained to you, I have broken bread unto you. The
   five thousand men signify the people ordered under the five books of
   the Law. The twelve baskets are the twelve Apostles, who themselves too
   were filled with the fragments of the Law. The two fishes are either
   the two precepts of the love of God and our neighbour, or the two
   people of the circumcision and uncircumcision, or those two sacred
   personages of the king and the priest. As these things are explained,
   they are broken; when they are understood, they are eaten.

   2. Let us turn to Him who did these things. He is Himself "The Bread
   which came down from heaven;" [3892] but Bread which refresheth the
   failing, and doth not fail; Bread which can be tasted, [3893] cannot be
   wasted. This Bread did the manna also figure. Wherefore it is said, "He
   gave them the Bread of heaven, man ate Angels' Bread." [3894] Who is
   the Bread of heaven, but Christ? But in order that man might eat
   Angels' Bread, the Lord of Angels was made Man. For if He had not been
   made Man, we should not have His Flesh; if we had not His Flesh, we
   should not eat the Bread of the Altar. Let us hasten to the
   inheritance, seeing we have hereby received a great earnest of it. My
   brethren, let us long for the life of Christ, seeing we hold as an
   earnest the Death of Christ. How shall He not give us His good things,
   who hath suffered our evil things? In this our earth, in this evil
   world, what abounds, but to be born, to labour, and to die? Examine
   thoroughly man's estate, convict me if I lie: consider all men whether
   they are in this world for any other end than to be born, to labour,
   and to die? This is the merchandize of our country: these things here
   abound. To such merchandize did that Merchantman descend. And forasmuch
   as every merchant gives and receives; gives what he has, and receives
   what he has not; when he procures anything, he gives money, and
   receives what he buys: so Christ too in this His traffic gave and
   received. But what received He? That which aboundeth here, to be born,
   to labour, and to die. And what did He give? To be born again, to rise
   again, and to reign for ever. O Good Merchant, buy us. Why should I say
   buy us, when we ought to give Thee thanks that Thou hast bought us?
   Thou dost deal out our Price to us, we drink Thy Blood; so dost thou
   deal out to us our Price. And we read the Gospel, our title [3895]
   deed. We are Thy servants, we are Thy creatures: Thou hast made us,
   Thou hast redeemed us. Any one can buy his servant, create him he
   cannot; but the Lord hath both created and redeemed His servants;
   created them, that they might be; redeemed them, that they might not be
   captives ever. For we fell into the hands of the prince of this world,
   who seduced Adam, and made him his servant, and began to possess us as
   his slaves. But the Redeemer came, and the seducer was overcome. And
   what did our Redeemer to him who held us captive? For our ransom he
   held out His Cross as a trap; he placed in It as a bait His Blood. He
   indeed had power to shed His Blood, he did not attain [3896] to drink
   it. And in that he shed the Blood of Him who was no debtor, he was
   commanded to render up the debtors; he shed the Blood of the Innocent,
   he was commanded to withdraw from the guilty. He verily shed His Blood
   to this end, that He might wipe out our sins. That then whereby he held
   us fast was effaced by the Redeemer's Blood. For he only held us fast
   by the bonds of our own sins. They were the captive's chains. He came,
   He bound the strong one with the bonds of His Passion; He entered into
   his house [3897] into the hearts, that is, of those where he did dwell,
   and took away his vessels. We are his vessels. He had filled them with
   his own bitterness. This bitterness too he pledged to our Redeemer in
   the gall. He had filled us then as his vessels; but our Lord spoiling
   his vessels, and making them His Own, poured out the bitterness, filled
   them with sweetness.

   3. Let us then love Him, for He is sweet. "Taste and see that the Lord
   is sweet." [3898] He is to be feared, but to be loved still more. He is
   Man and God; the One Christ is Man and God; as one man is soul and
   body: but God and Man are not two Persons. In Christ indeed there are
   two substances, God and Man; but one Person, that the Trinity may
   remain, and that there be not a quaternity introduced by the addition
   of the human [3899] nature. How then can it be that God should not have
   mercy upon us, for whose sake God was made Man? Much is that which He
   hath done already; more wonderful is that which He hath done, than what
   He hath promised; and by that which He hath done, ought we to believe
   what He hath promised. For that which He hath done, we should scarcely
   believe, unless we also saw it. Where do we see it? In the peoples that
   believe, in the multitude that has been brought unto Him. For that hath
   been fulfilled which was promised to Abraham; [3900] and from these
   things which we see, we believe what we do not see. Abraham was one
   single man, and to him was it said, "In thy seed shall all nations be
   blessed." If he had looked to himself, when would he have believed? He
   was one single man, and was now old; and he had a barren wife, and one
   who was so far advanced in age, that she could not conceive, even
   though she had not been barren. There was nothing at all from which any
   hope could be drawn. But he looked to Him That gave the promise, and
   believed what he did not see. Lo, what he believed, we see. Therefore
   from these things which we see, we ought to believe what we see not. He
   begat Isaac, we saw it not; and Isaac begat Jacob, and this we did not
   see; and Jacob begat twelve sons, and them we saw not; and his twelve
   sons begat the people of Israel; this great people we see. I have now
   begun to mention those things which we do see. Of the people of Israel
   was born the Virgin Mary, and she gave birth to Christ; and, lo, in
   Christ all nations are blessed. What more true? more certain? more
   plain? Together with me, long after the world to come, ye who have been
   gathered together out of the nations. In this world hath God fulfilled
   His promise concerning the seed of Abraham. How shall He not give us
   His eternal promises, whom He hath made to be Abraham's seed? For this
   the Apostle saith: "But if ye be Christ's" (they are the Apostle's
   words), "then are ye Abraham's seed." [3901]

   4. We have begun to be some great thing; let no man despise himself: we
   were once nothing; but we are something. We have said unto the Lord,
   "Remember that we are dust;" [3902] but out of the dust He made man,
   and to dust He gave life, and in Christ our Lord hath He already
   brought this same dust to the Kingdom of Heaven. For from this dust
   took He flesh, from this took earth, and hath raised earth to heaven,
   He who made heaven and earth. If then these two new things, not yet
   done, were set before us, and it were asked of us, "Which is the most
   wonderful, that He who is God should be made Man, or he who is man
   should be made a man of God? which is the more wonderful? which the
   more difficult?" What hath Christ promised us? That which as yet we see
   not; that is, that we should be His men, and reign with Him, and never
   die? This is so to say with difficulty believed, that a man once born
   should arrive at that life, where he shall never die. This is what we
   believe with a heart well cleansed, [3903] cleansed, I mean, of the
   world's dust; that this dust close not up our eye of faith. This it is
   that we are bid believe, that after we have been dead, we shall be even
   with our dead bodies in life, where we shall never die. Wonderful it
   is; but more wonderful is that which Christ hath done. For which is the
   more incredible, that man should live for ever, or that God should ever
   die? That men should receive life from God is the more credible; that
   God should receive death from men I suppose is the more incredible. Yet
   this hath been brought to pass already: let us then believe that which
   is to be. If that which is the more incredible hath been brought to
   pass, shall He not give us that which is the more credible? For God
   hath power to make of men Angels, who hath made of earthy and filthy
   spawn, [3904] men. What shall we be? Angels. What have we been? I am
   ashamed to call it to mind; I am forced to consider it, yet I blush to
   tell it. What have we been? Whence did God make men? What were we
   before we were at all? We were nothing. When we were in our mother's
   wombs, what were we? It is enough that ye remember. Withdraw your minds
   from the whence ye were made, and think of what ye are. Ye live; but so
   do herbs and trees live. Ye have sensation, and so have cattle
   sensation. Ye are men, ye have got beyond the cattle, ye are superior
   to the cattle; for that ye understand how great things He hath done for
   you. Ye have life, ye have sensation, ye have understanding, ye are
   men. Now to this benefit what can be compared? Ye are Christians. For
   if we had not received this, what would it profit us, that we were men!
   So then we are Christians, we belong to Christ. For all the world's
   rage, it doth not break us; because we belong to Christ. For all the
   world's caresses, it doth not seduce us; we belong to Christ.

   5. A great Patron have we found, Brethren. Ye know that men depend
   [3905] much upon their patrons. A dependent of a man in power will make
   answer to any one who threatens him. "Thou canst do nothing to me, as
   long as my lord's head is safe." How much more boldly and surely may we
   say, "Thou canst do nothing to us, whilst our Head is safe." Forasmuch
   as our Patron is our Head. Whosoever depend upon any man as patron, are
   his dependents; we are the members of our Patron. Let Him bear us in
   Himself, and let no man tear us away from Him. Since what labours
   soever we shall have endured in this world, all that passeth away, is
   nothing. The good things shall come which shall not pass away; by
   labours we arrive at them. But when we have arrived, no one teareth us
   away from them. The gates of Jerusalem are shut; they receive the bolts
   too, that to that city it may be said, "Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem,
   praise thy God, O Sion. For He hath strengthened the bolts of thy
   gates; He hath blessed thy children within thee. Who hath made thy
   borders peace." [3906] When the gates are shut, and the bolts drawn, no
   friend goeth out, no enemy entereth in. There shall we have true and
   assured security, if here we shall not have abandoned the truth.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3890] Vilitas.

   [3891] John v. 46.

   [3892] John vi. 41.

   [3893] Qui sumi potest, consumi non potest.

   [3894] Ps. lxxvii. 24, 25, Sept. (lxxviii. English version).

   [3895] Instrumentum.

   [3896] Meruit.

   [3897] Matt. xii. 29.

   [3898] Ps. xxxiii. 8, Vulgate (xxxiv. 8, English version).

   [3899] Homine. Vid. Serm. xvii. (lxvii. Ben.) 7 (iv.), note.

   [3900] Gen. xii. 3.

   [3901] Gal. iii. 29.

   [3902] Ps. cii. 14, Sept. (ciii. English version).

   [3903] Excusso.

   [3904] Semina.

   [3905] Tendunt se.

   [3906] Ps. cxlvii. 12-14.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXXI.

   [CXXXI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John vi. 53, "Except ye eat the flesh,"
   etc., and on the words of the apostles. And the Psalms. Against the
   Pelagians.

   Delivered at the Table of the Martyr St. Cyprian, the 9th

   of the Calends of October,--23 Sept., on the Lord's day.

   1. We have heard the True Master, the Divine Redeemer, the human
   Saviour, commending to us our Ransom, His Blood. For He spake to us of
   His Body and Blood; He called His Body Meat, His Blood Drink. The
   faithful recognise the Sacrament of the faithful. But the hearers what
   else do they but hear? When therefore commending such Meat and such
   Drink He said, "Except ye shall eat My Flesh and drink My Blood, ye
   shall have no life in you;" [3907] (and this that He said concerning
   life, who else said it but the Life Itself? But that man shall have
   death, not life, who shall think that the Life is false), His disciples
   were offended, not all of them indeed, but very many, saying within
   themselves, "This is an hard saying, who can hear it?" [3908] But when
   the Lord knew this in Himself, and heard the murmurings of their
   thought, He answered them, thinking though uttering nothing, that they
   might understand that they were heard, and might cease to entertain
   such thoughts. What then did He answer? "Doth this offend you?" "What
   then if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where He was before?"
   [3909] What meaneth this? "Doth this offend you?" "Do ye imagine that I
   am about to make divisions of this My Body which ye see; and to cut up
   My Members, and give them to you? What then if ye shall see the Son of
   Man ascend up where He was before?'" Assuredly, He who could ascend
   Whole could not be consumed. So then He both gave us of His Body and
   Blood a healthful refreshment, and briefly solved so great a question
   as to His Own Entireness. Let them then who eat, eat on, and them that
   drink, drink; let them hunger and thirst; eat Life, drink Life. That
   eating, is to be refreshed; but thou art in such wise refreshed, as
   that that whereby thou art refreshed, faileth not. That drinking, what
   is it but to live? Eat Life, drink Life; thou shalt have life, and the
   Life is Entire. But then this shall be, that is, the Body and the Blood
   of Christ shall be each man's Life; if what is taken in the Sacrament
   visibly is in the truth itself eaten spiritually, drunk spiritually.
   For we have heard the Lord Himself saying, "It is the Spirit That
   quickeneth, but the flesh profiteth nothing. The words that I have
   spoken unto you, are Spirit and Life. But there are some of you," saith
   He, "that believe not." [3910] Such were they who said, "This is a hard
   saying, who can hear it?" It is hard, but only to the hard; that is, it
   is incredible, but only to the incredulous.

   2. But in order to teach us that this very believing is matter of gift,
   not of desert, He saith, "As I have said unto you, no man cometh unto
   Me, except it were given him of My Father." [3911] Now as to where the
   Lord said this, if we call to mind the foregoing words of the Gospel,
   we shall find that He had said, "No man cometh unto Me, except the
   Father which hath sent Me draw him." [3912] He did not lead, but draw.
   This violence is done to the heart, not the body. Why then dost thou
   marvel? Believe, and thou comest; love, and thou art drawn. Do not
   suppose here any rough and uneasy violence; it is gentle, it is sweet;
   it is the very sweetness that draweth thee. Is not a sheep drawn, when
   fresh grass is shown to it in its hunger? Yet I imagine that it is not
   bodily driven on, but fast bound by desire. In such wise do thou come
   too to Christ; do not conceive of long journeyings; where thou
   believest, there thou comest. For unto Him, who is everywhere we come
   by love, not by sailing. But forasmuch as even in this kind of voyage,
   waves and tempests of divers temptations abound; believe on the
   Crucified; that thy faith may be able to ascend the Wood. Thou shalt
   not sink, but shalt be borne upon the Wood. Thus, even thus, amid the
   waves of this world did he sail, who said, "But God forbid that I
   should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ." [3913]

   3. But wonderful it is, that when Christ Crucified is preached, two
   hear, one despiseth, the other ascendeth. Let him that despiseth,
   impute it to himself; let not him that ascendeth, arrogate it to
   himself. For he hath heard from the True Master; "No man cometh unto
   Me, except it were given unto him of My Father." Let him joy, that it
   hath been given; let him render thanks to Him who giveth it, with a
   humble, not an arrogant heart; lest what he hath attained [3914]
   through humility, he lose through pride. For even they who are already
   walking in this way of righteousness, if they attribute it to
   themselves, and to their own strength, perish out of it. And therefore
   Holy Scripture teaching us humility saith by the Apostle, "Work out
   your own salvation with fear and trembling." [3915] And lest hereupon
   they should attribute ought to themselves, because he said, "Work," he
   subjoined immediately, "For it is God who worketh in you both to will
   and to do of His good pleasure." [3916] "It is God who worketh in you;"
   therefore "with fear and trembling," make a valley, receive the rain.
   Low grounds are filled, high grounds are dried up. Grace is rain. Why
   dost thou marvel then, if "God resist the proud, and giveth grace unto
   the lowly"? [3917] Therefore, "with fear and trembling;" that is, with
   humility. "Be not high-minded, but fear." [3918] Fear that thou mayest
   be filled; be not high-minded, lest thou be dried up.

   4. But you will say, "I am walking in this way already; once there was
   need for me to learn, there was need for me to know by the teaching of
   the law what I had to do: now I have the free choice of the will; who
   shall withdraw me from this way?" If thou read carefully, thou wilt
   find that a certain man began to uplift himself, on a certain abundance
   of his, which he had nevertheless received; but that the Lord in mercy,
   to teach him humility, took away what He had given; and he was on a
   sudden reduced to poverty, and confessing the mercy of God in his
   recollection, he said, "In my abundance I said, I shall never be
   moved." [3919] "In my abundance I said." But I said it, I who am a man
   said it; "All men are liars, I said." [3920] Therefore, "in my
   abundance I said;" so great was the abundance, that I dared to say, "I
   shall never be moved." What next? "O Lord, in Thy favour Thou gavest
   strength to my beauty." But "Thou turnedst away Thy Face from me, and I
   was troubled." [3921] "Thou hast shown me," saith he, "that that
   wherein I did abound, was of Thee. Thou hast shown me Whence I should
   seek, to Whom attribute what I had received, to Whom I ought to render
   thanks, to Whom I should run in my thirst, Whereby be filled, and with
   Whom keep that whereby I should be filled. For my strength will I keep
   to Thee;' [3922] whereby I am by Thy bounty filled, through Thy safe
   keeping I will not lose. My strength will I keep to Thee.' That Thou
   mightest show me this, Thou turnedst away Thy Face from me, and I was
   troubled.' Troubled,' because dried up; dried up, because exalted. Say
   then thou dry and parched one, that thou mayest be filled again; My
   soul is as earth without water unto Thee.' [3923] Say, My soul is as
   earth without water unto Thee.' For Thou hast said, not the Lord, I
   shall never be moved.' Thou hast said it, presuming on thine own
   strength; but it was not of thyself, and thou didst think as if it
   were."

   5. What then doth the Lord say? "Serve ye the Lord in fear, and rejoice
   unto Him with trembling." [3924] So the Apostle too, "Work out your own
   salvation with fear and trembling. For it is God who worketh in you."
   Therefore rejoice with trembling: "Lest at any time the Lord be angry."
   I see that you anticipate me by your crying out. For you know what I am
   about to say, you anticipate it by crying out. And whence have ye this,
   but that He taught you to whom ye have by believing come? This then He
   saith; hear what ye know already; I am not teaching, but in preaching
   am calling to your remembrance; nay, I am neither teaching, seeing that
   ye know already, nor calling to remembrance, seeing that ye remember,
   but let us say all together what together with us ye retain. "Embrace
   discipline, and rejoice," but, "with trembling," [3925] that, humble ye
   may ever hold fast that which ye have received. "Lest at any time the
   Lord be angry;" with the proud of course, attributing to themselves
   what they have, not rendering thanks to Him, from whom they have. "Lest
   at any time the Lord be angry, and ye perish from the righteous way."
   Did he say, Lest at any time the Lord be angry, and ye come not into
   the righteous way"? Did he say, "Lest the Lord be angry, and He bring
   you not to the righteous way"? or "admit you not into the righteous
   way? Ye are walking in it already, be not proud, lest ye even perish
   from it. And ye perish,' saith he, from the righteous way.'" "When His
   wrath shall be kindled in a short time" [3926] against you. At no
   distant time. As soon as thou art proud, thou losest at once what thou
   hadst received. As though man terrified by all this were to say, "What
   shall I do then?" It follows, "Blessed are all they that trust in Him:"
   not in themselves, but in Him. "By grace are we saved, not of
   ourselves, but it is the gift of God." [3927]

   6. Peradventure ye are saying, "What does he mean, that he is so often
   saying this? A second and a third time he says it; and scarcely ever
   speaks, but when he says it." Would that I may not say it in vain! For
   men there are unthankful to grace, attributing much to poor and
   disabled nature. True it is, when man was created he received great
   power of free-will; but he lost it by sin. He fell into death, became
   infirm, was left in the way by the robbers half dead; the Samaritan,
   which is by interpretation keeper, passing by lifted him up on his own
   beast; [3928] he is still being brought to the inn. Why is he lifted
   up? He is still in process of curing. "But," he will say, "it is enough
   for me that in baptism I received remission of all sins." Because
   iniquity was blotted out, was therefore infirmity brought to an end? "I
   received," says he, "remission of all sins." It is quite true. All sins
   were blotted out in the Sacrament of Baptism, all entirely, of words,
   deeds, thoughts, all were blotted out. But this is the "oil and wine"
   which was poured in by the way. Ye remember, beloved Brethren, that man
   who was wounded by the robbers, and half dead by the way, how he was
   strengthened, by receiving oil and wine for his wounds. His error
   indeed was already pardoned, and yet his weakness is in process of
   healing in the inn. The inn, if ye recognise it, is the Church. In the
   time present, an inn, because in life we are passing by: it will be a
   home, whence we shall never remove, when we shall have got in perfect
   health unto the kingdom of heaven. Meanwhile receive we gladly our
   treatment in the inn, and weak as we still are, glory we not of sound
   health: lest through our pride we gain nothing else, but never for all
   our treatment to be cured.

   7. "Bless the Lord, O my soul." [3929] Say, yea say to thy soul, "Thou
   art still in this life, still bearest about a frail flesh, still "doth
   the corruptible body press down the soul;" [3930] still after the
   entireness of remission hast thou received the remedy of prayer; for
   still, whilst thy weaknesses are being healed, dost thou say, "Forgive
   us our debts." [3931] Say then to thy soul, thou lowly valley, not an
   exalted hill; say to thy soul, "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget
   not all His benefits." [3932] What benefits? Tell them, enumerate them,
   render thanks. What benefits? "Who forgiveth all thine iniquities."
   [3933] This took place in baptism. What takes place now? "Who healeth
   all thy weaknesses." This takes place now; I acknowledge. But as long
   as I am here, "the corruptible body presseth down the soul." Say then
   also that which comes next, "Who redeemeth thy life from corruption."
   [3934] After redemption from corruption, what remaineth? "When this
   corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have
   put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
   written, Death is swallowed up in victory. Where, O death, is thy
   contention?" There rightly, "O death, where is thy sting?" [3935] Thou
   seekest its place, and findest it not. What is "the sting of death"?
   What is, "O death, where is thy sting?" Where is sin? Thou seekest, and
   it is nowhere. For "the sting of death is sin." They are the Apostle's
   words, not mine. Then shall it be said, "O death, where is thy sting?"
   Sin shall nowhere be, neither to surprise thee, nor to assault thee,
   nor to inflame [3936] thy conscience. Then it shall not be said,
   "Forgive us our debts." But what shall be said? "O Lord our God, give
   us peace: for Thou hast rendered all things unto us." [3937]

   8. Finally, after the redemption from all corruption, what remaineth
   but the crown of righteousness? This at least remaineth, but even in
   it, or under it, let not the head be swollen that it may receive the
   crown. Hear, mark well the Psalm, how that crown will not have a
   swollen head. After he had said, "Who redeemeth thy life from
   corruption;" he saith, "Who crowneth thee." Here thou wert ready at
   once to say, "Crowneth thee,' is an acknowledgment of my merits, my own
   excellence hath done it; it is the payment of a debt, not a gift." Give
   ear rather to the Psalm. For it is thou again that sayest this; and
   "all men are liars." [3938] Hear what God saith; "Who crowneth thee
   with mercy and pity." Of His mercy He crowneth thee, of His pity He
   crowneth thee. For thou hadst no worthiness that He should call thee,
   and being called should justify thee, being justified glorify thee.
   "The remnant is saved by the election of grace. But if by grace, then
   is it no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace. For to him
   that worketh, the reward shall not be reckoned according to grace, but
   according to debt." [3939] The Apostle saith, "Not according to grace,
   but according to debt." But "thee He crowneth with pity and mercy;" and
   if thy own merits have gone before, God saith to thee, "Examine well
   thy merits, and thou shalt see that they are My gifts."

   9. This then is the righteousness of God. As it is called, "The Lord's
   salvation," [3940] not whereby the Lord is saved, but which He giveth
   to them whom He saveth; so too the grace of God through Jesus Christ
   our Lord is called the righteousness of God, not as that whereby the
   Lord is righteous, but whereby He justifieth those whom of ungodly He
   maketh righteous. But some, as the Jews in former times, both wish to
   be called Christians, and still ignorant of God's righteousness, desire
   to establish their own, even in our own times, in the times of open
   grace, the times of the full revelation of grace which before was
   hidden; in the times of grace now manifested in the floor, which once
   lay hid in the fleece. I see that a few have understood me, that more
   have not understood, whom I will by no means defraud by keeping
   silence. Gideon, one of the righteous men of old, asked for a sign from
   the Lord, and said, "I pray, Lord, that this fleece which I put in the
   floor be bedewed, [3941] and that the floor be dry." [3942] And it was
   so; the fleece was bedewed, the whole floor was dry. In the morning he
   wrung out the fleece in a basin; forasmuch as to the humble is grace
   given; and in a basin, ye know what the Lord did to His disciples.
   Again, he asked for another sign; "O Lord, I would," saith he, "that
   the fleece be dry, the floor bedewed." And it was so. Call to mind the
   time of the Old Testament, grace was hidden in a cloud, as the rain in
   the fleece. Mark now the time of the New Testament, consider well the
   nation of the Jews, thou wilt find it as a dry fleece; whereas the
   whole world, like that floor, is full of grace, not hidden, but
   manifested. Wherefore we are forced exceedingly to bewail our brethren,
   who strive not against hidden, but against open and manifested grace.
   There is allowance for the Jews. What shall we say of Christians?
   Wherefore are ye enemies to the grace of Christ? Why rely ye on
   yourselves? Why unthankful? For why did Christ come? Was not nature
   here before? Was not nature here, which ye only deceive by your
   excessive praise? Was not the Law here? But the Apostle says, "If
   righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain." [3943]
   What the Apostle says of the Law, that say we of nature to these men.
   "If righteousness come by nature, then Christ is dead in vain."

   10. What then was said of the Jews, the same altogether do we see in
   these men now. "They have a zeal of God: I hear them record that they
   have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge." [3944] What is,
   "not according to knowledge"? "For being ignorant of God's
   righteousness, and wishing to establish their own, they have not
   submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God." [3945] My
   Brethren, share with me in my sorrow. When ye find such as these, do
   not hide them; be there no such misdirected [3946] mercy in you; by all
   means, when ye find such, hide them not. Convince the gainsayers, and
   those who resist, bring to us. For already have two [3947] councils on
   this question been sent to the Apostolic see; and rescripts also have
   come from thence. The question has been brought to an issue; would that
   their error may sometime be brought to an issue too! Therefore do we
   advise that they may take heed, we teach that they may be instructed,
   we pray that they may be changed. Let us turn to the Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3907] John vi. 53.

   [3908] John vi. 60.

   [3909] John vi. 61, 62.

   [3910] John vi. 63, 64.

   [3911] John vi. 65.

   [3912] John vi. 44.

   [3913] Gal. vi. 14.

   [3914] Meruit.

   [3915] Phil. ii. 12.

   [3916] Phil. ii. 13.

   [3917] Jas. iv. 6.

   [3918] Rom. xi. 20.

   [3919] Ps. xxix. 6, Sept. (xxx. English version).

   [3920] Ps. cxvi. 11.

   [3921] Ps. xxix. 8, Sept. (xxx. 7, English version).

   [3922] Ps. lviii. 10, Sept. (lix. 9, English version).

   [3923] Ps. cxlii. 6, Sept. (cxliii. English version).

   [3924] Ps. ii. 11, Sept.

   [3925] Ps. ii. 12, Sept.

   [3926] Ps. ii. 13, Sept.

   [3927] Eph. ii. 8.

   [3928] Luke x. 30, etc.

   [3929] Ps. ciii. 1.

   [3930] Wisd. ix. 15.

   [3931] Matt. vi. 12.

   [3932] Ps. ciii. 2.

   [3933] Ps. ciii. 3.

   [3934] Ps. ciii. 4.

   [3935] 1 Cor. xv. 54, 55.

   [3936] Titillet.

   [3937] Isa. xxvi. 12, Sept.

   [3938] Ps. cxvi. 11.

   [3939] Rom. xi. 5, 6, iv. 4.

   [3940] Ps. iii. 9, Sept. (iii. 8, English version).

   [3941] Compluatur.

   [3942] Judg. vi. 37.

   [3943] Gal. ii. 21.

   [3944] Rom. x. 2.

   [3945] Rom. x. 3.

   [3946] Perversa.

   [3947] Of Carthage and Milevis which are among the Epistles of St.
   Augustin, 175, 176. And the rescripts of the Roman Pontiff, Innocent
   (A.D. 417), in the Epistles 181, 182. Ben. ed. note.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXXII.

   [CXXXII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John vi. 55,"For my flesh is meat indeed,
   and my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh," etc.

   1. As we heard when the Holy Gospel was being read, the Lord Jesus
   Christ exhorted us by the promise of eternal life to eat His Flesh and
   drink His Blood. Ye that heard these words, have not all as yet
   understood them. For those of you who have been baptized and the
   faithful do know what He meant. But those among you who are yet called
   Catechumens, or Hearers, could be hearers, when it was being read,
   could they be understanders too? Accordingly our discourse is directed
   to both. Let them who already eat the Flesh of the Lord and drink His
   Blood, think What it is they eat and drink, lest, as the Apostle says,
   "They eat and drink judgment to themselves." [3948] But they who do not
   yet eat and drink, let them hasten when invited to such a Banquet.
   Throughout these days the teachers feed you. Christ daily feedeth you,
   That His Table is ever ordered before you. What is the reason. O
   Hearers, that ye see the Table, and come not to the Banquet? And
   peradventure, just now when the Gospel was being read, ye said in your
   hearts, "We are thinking what it is that He saith, My Flesh is meat
   indeed, and My Blood is drink indeed.' [3949] How is the Flesh of the
   Lord eaten, and the Blood of the Lord drunk? We are thinking what He
   saith." Who hath closed it against thee, that thou dost not know this?
   There is a veil over it; but if thou wilt, the veil shall be taken
   away. Come to the profession, [3950] and thou hast resolved the
   difficulty. For what the Lord Jesus said, the faithful know well
   already. But thou art called a Catechumen, art called a Hearer, and art
   deaf. For the ears of the booty thou hast open, seeing that thou
   hearest the words which were spoken; but the ears of the heart thou
   hast still closed, seeing thou understandest not what was spoken. I
   plead, [3951] I do not discuss it. Lo, Easter [3952] is at hand, give
   in thy name for baptism. If the festivity arouse thee not, let the very
   curiosity induce thee: that thou mayest know the meaning of, Whoso
   eateth My Flesh and drinketh My Blood dwelleth in Me, and I in him."
   [3953] That thou mayest know with me what is meant, "Knock, and it
   shall be opened unto thee:" [3954] and as I say to thee, "Knock, and it
   shall be opened unto thee," so do I too knock, open thou to me. When I
   speak aloud to the ears, I knock at the breast.

   2. But if the Catechumens, my Brethren, are to be exhorted not to delay
   to approach to this so great grace of regeneration; what great care
   ought we to have in building up the faithful, that their approaching
   may profit them, and that they eat and drink not such a Banquet unto
   their own judgment? Now that they may not eat and drink unto judgment,
   let them live well. Be ye exhorters, not by words, but by your conduct;
   that they who have not been baptized, may in such wise hasten to follow
   you, that they perish not by imitating you. Do ye who are married keep
   the fidelity of the marriage-bed with your wives. Render what you
   require. As a husband thou requirest chastity from thy wife; give her
   an example, not words. Thou art the head, look where thou goest. For
   thou oughtest to go where it may not be dangerous for her to follow:
   yea, thou oughtest to walk thyself where thou wouldest have her follow.
   Thou requirest strength from the weaker sex; the lust of the flesh ye
   have both of you: let him that is the stronger, be the first to
   conquer. And yet, which is to be lamented, many men are conquered by
   the women. Women preserve chastity, which men will not preserve; and in
   that they preserve it not, would wish to appear men: as though he was
   in sex the stronger, only that the enemy might more easily subdue him.
   There is a struggle, a war, a combat. The man is stronger than the
   woman, the "man is the head of the woman." [3955] The woman combats and
   overcomes; dost thou succumb to the enemy? The body stands firm, and
   does the head lie low? But those of you who have not yet wives, and who
   yet already approach to the Lord's Table, and eat the Flesh of Christ,
   and drink His Blood, if ye are about to marry, keep yourselves for your
   wives. As ye would have them come to you, such ought they also to find
   you. What young man is there who would not wish to marry a chaste wife?
   And if he were to espouse a virgin who would not desire she should be
   unpolluted? Thou lookest for one unpolluted, be unpolluted thyself.
   Thou lookest for one pure, be not thyself impure. For it is not that
   she is able, and thou art not able. If it were not possible, then could
   not she be so. But, seeing that she can, let this teach thee, that it
   is possible. And that she may have this power, God is her ruler. But
   thou wilt have greater glory if thou shalt do it. Why greater glory?
   The vigilance of parents is a check to her, the very modesty of the
   weaker sex is a bridle to her; lastly, she is in fear of the laws of
   which thou art not afraid. Therefore it is then that thou wilt have
   greater glory if thou shalt do it; because if thou do it, thou fearest
   God. She has many things to fear besides God, thou fearest God alone.
   But He whom thou fearest is greater than all. He is to be feared in
   public, He in secret. Thou goest out, thou art seen; thou goest in,
   thou art seen; the lamp is lighted, He seeth thee; the lamp is
   extinguished, He seeth thee; thou enterest into thy closet, He seeth
   thee; in the retirement [3956] of thine own heart, He seeth thee. Fear
   Him, Him whose care it is to see thee; and even by this fear be chaste.
   Or if thou wilt sin, seek for some place where He may not see thee, and
   do what thou wouldest.

   3. But ye who have taken the vow already, chasten your bodies more
   strictly, and suffer not yourselves to loosen the reins of
   concupiscence even after those things which are permitted; that ye may
   not only turn away from an unlawful connection, [3957] but may despise
   even a lawful look. Remember, in whichever sex ye are, whether men or
   women, that ye are leading on earth the life of Angels: "For the Angels
   are neither given in marriage, nor marry." [3958] This shall we be,
   when we shall have risen again. How much better are ye, who before
   death begin to be what men will be after the resurrection! Keep your
   proper degrees, for God keepeth for you your honours. The resurrection
   of the dead is compared to the stars that are set in heaven. "For star
   differeth from star in glory," as the Apostle says; "so also is the
   resurrection of the dead." [3959] For after one manner virginity shall
   shine there, after another shall wedded chastity shine there, after
   another shall holy widowhood shine there. They shall shine diversely,
   but all shall be there. The brilliancy unequal, the heaven the same.

   4. With your thoughts then on your degrees, and keeping your
   professions, approach ye to the Flesh of the Lord, approach to the
   Blood of the Lord. Whoso knoweth himself to be otherwise, let him not
   approach. Be moved to compunction rather by my words. For they who know
   that they are keeping for their wives, what from their wives they
   require, they who know that they are in every way keeping continence,
   if this they have vowed to God, feel joy at my words; but they who hear
   me say, "Whosoever of you are not keeping chastity, approach not to
   that Bread," are saddened. And I should have no wish to say this; but
   what can I do? Shall I fear man, so as to suppress the truth? What, if
   those servants do not fear the Lord, shall I therefore too not fear? as
   if I do not know that it is said, "Thou wicked and slothful servant,'
   [3960] thou shouldest dispense, and I require." Lo, I have dispensed, O
   Lord my God; lo, in Thy Sight, and in the sight of Thy Holy Angels, and
   of this Thy people, I have laid out Thy money; for I am afraid of Thy
   judgment. I have dispensed, do Thou require. Though I should not say
   it, Thou wouldest do it. Therefore I rather say, I have dispensed, do
   Thou convert, do Thou spare. Make them chaste who have been unchaste,
   that in Thy Sight we may rejoice together when the judgment shall come,
   both he who hath dispensed and he to whom it hath been dispensed. Doth
   this please you? May it do so! Whosoever of you are unchaste, amend
   yourselves, whilst ye are alive. For I have power to speak the word of
   God, but to deliver the unchaste, who persevere in wickedness, from the
   judgment and condemnation of God, have I no power.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3948] 1 Cor. xi. 29.

   [3949] John vi. 55.

   [3950] Baptismal profession.

   [3951] Disputo non dissero.

   [3952] Pascha.

   [3953] John vi. 56.

   [3954] Matt. vii. 7.

   [3955] Eph. v. 23.

   [3956] In corde versaris.

   [3957] Concubitu.

   [3958] Matt. xxii. 30.

   [3959] 1 Cor. xv. 41, 42.

   [3960] Matt. xxv. 26.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXXIII.

   [CXXXIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel of John vii. 6, etc., where Jesus said that
   He was not going up unto the feast, and notwithstanding went up.

   1. I Purpose by the Lord's assistance to treat of this section [3961]
   of the Gospel which has just been read; nor is there a little
   difficulty here, lest the truth be endangered, and falsehood glory. Not
   that either the truth can perish, nor falsehood triumph. Now hearken
   for a while what difficulty this lesson has; and being made attentive
   by the propounding of the difficulty, pray that I may be sufficient for
   its solution. "The Jews' feast of tabernacles was at hand;" [3962]
   these it seems are the days which they observe even to this day, when
   they build huts. [3963] For this solemnity of theirs is called from the
   building of tabernacles; since skene means a "tabernacle," skenopegia
   is the building of a tabernacle. These days were kept as feast days
   among the Jews; and it was called one feast day, not because it was
   over in one day, but because it was kept up by a continued festivity;
   just as the feast day of the Passover, and the feast day of unleavened
   bread, and notwithstanding, as is manifest, that feast is kept
   throughout many days. This anniversary then was at hand in Judæa, the
   Lord Jesus was in Galilee, where He had also been brought up, where too
   He had relations and kinsfolk, whom Scripture calls "His brethren."
   "His brethren, therefore," as we have heard it read, "said unto Him,
   Pass from hence, and go into Judæa; that Thy disciples also may see Thy
   works that Thou doest. For no man doeth anything in secret, and himself
   seeketh to be known openly. If Thou do these things, manifest Thyself
   to the world." [3964] Then the Evangelist subjoins, "For neither did
   His brethren believe in Him." [3965] If then they did not believe in
   Him, the words they threw out were of envy. "Jesus answered them, My
   time is not yet come; but your time is alway ready. The world cannot
   hate you; but Me it hateth, because I testify of it that the works
   thereof are evil. Go ye up to this feast day. I go [3966] not up to
   this feast day, for My time is not yet accomplished." [3967] Then
   follows the Evangelist; "When He had said these words, He Himself
   stayed in Galilee. But when His brethren were gone up, then went He
   also up to the feast day, not openly, but as it were in secret." [3968]
   Thus far is the extent of the difficulty, all the rest is clear.

   2. What then is the difficulty? what makes the perplexity? what is in
   peril? Lest the Lord, yea, to speak more plainly, lest the Truth Itself
   should be thought to have lied. For if we would have it thought that He
   lied, the weak will receive an authority for lying. We have heard say
   that He lied. For those who think that He lied, speak thus, "He said
   that He should not go up to the feast day, and He went up." In the
   first place then, let us, as far as in the press of time we can, see
   whether he does lie, who says a thing and does it not. For example, I
   have told a friend, "I will see you to-morrow;" some greater necessity
   occurs to hinder me; I have not on that account spoken falsely. For
   when I made the promise, I meant what I said. But when some greater
   matter occurred, which hindered the accomplishment [3969] of my
   promise, I had no design to lie, but I was not able to fulfil the
   promise. Lo, to my thinking I have used no labour to persuade you, but
   have merely suggested to your good sense, [3970] that he who promises
   something, and doeth it not, does not lie, if, that he do it not,
   something has occurred to hinder the fulfilment of his promise, not to
   be any proof of falsehood.

   3. But some one who hears me will say, "Canst thou then say this of
   Christ, that He either was not able to fulfil what He would, or that He
   did not know things to come?" Thou doest well, good is thy suggestion,
   right thy hint; but, O man, share with me my anxiety. Dare we to say
   that He lies, Who we do not dare to say is weak in power? I for my
   part, to the best of my thinking, as far as according to my infirmity I
   am able to judge, would choose that a man should be deceived in any
   matter rather than lie in any. For to be deceived is the portion of
   infirmity, to lie of iniquity. "Thou hatest, O Lord," saith he, "all
   them that work iniquity." [3971] And immediately after, "Thou shalt
   destroy all them that speak a lie." [3972] Either "iniquity" and "a
   lie" are upon a level; or, "Thou shalt destroy," is more than "Thou
   hatest." For he who is held in hatred, is not immediately punished by
   destruction. But let that question be, whether there be ever a
   necessity to lie; for I am not now discussing that; it is a dark
   question, and has many lappings; [3973] I have not time to cut them,
   and to come to the quick. [3974] Therefore let the treatment of it be
   deferred to some other time; for peradventure it will be cured by the
   Divine assistance without any words of mine. But attend and distinguish
   between what I have deferred, and what I wish to treat of to-day.
   Whether on any occasion one may lie, this difficult and most obscure
   question I defer. But whether Christ lied, whether the Truth spake
   anything false, this, being reminded of it by the Gospel lesson, have I
   undertaken to-day.

   4. Now what the difference is between being deceived, and lying, I will
   briefly state. He is deceived who thinks what he says to be true, and
   therefore says it, because he thinks it true. Now if this which he that
   is deceived says, were true, he would not be deceived; if it were not
   only true, but he also knew it to be true, he would not lie. He is
   deceived then, in that it is false, and he thinks it true; but he only
   says it because he thinks it true. The error lies in human infirmity,
   not in the soundness of the conscience. But whosoever thinks it to be
   false, and asserts it as true, he lies. See, my Brethren, draw the
   distinction, ye who have been brought up in the Church, instructed in
   the Lord's Scriptures, not uninformed, nor simple, [3975] nor ignorant
   [3976] men. For there are among you men learned and erudite, and not
   indifferently instructed in all kinds of literature; and with those of
   you who have not learnt that literature which is called liberal, it is
   more that ye have been nourished up in the word of God. If I labour in
   explaining what I mean, do ye aid me both by the attention of your
   hearing, and the thoughtfulness [3977] of your meditations. Nor will ye
   aid, unless ye are aided. Wherefore pray we mutually for one another,
   and look equally for our common Succour. He is deceived, who whereas
   what he says is false, thinks it to be true; but he lies, who thinks a
   thing to be false, and gives it out as true, whether it be true or
   false. Observe what I have added, "whether it be true or false;" yet he
   who thinks it to be false, and asserts it as true, lies; he aims to
   deceive. For what good is it to him, that it is true? He all the while
   thinks it false, and says it as if it were true. What he says is true
   in itself, it is in itself true; with regard to him it is false, his
   conscience does not hold that which he is saying; he thinks in himself
   one thing to be true, he gives out another for truth. His is a double
   heart, not single; he does not bring out that which he has in it. The
   double heart has long since been condemned. "With deceitful lips in a
   heart and a heart have they spoken evil things." [3978] Had it been
   enough to say, "in the heart have they spoken evil things," where is
   the "deceitful lips"? [3979] What is deceit? When one thing is done,
   another pretended. Deceitful lips are not a single heart; and because
   not a single heart, therefore "in a heart and a heart;" therefore "in a
   heart" twice, because the heart is double.

   5. How then think we of the Lord Jesus Christ, that He lied? If it is a
   less evil to be deceived than to lie, dare we to say that He lies who
   we dare not to say is deceived? But He is neither deceived, nor doth He
   lie; but in very deed as it is written (for of Him is it understood, of
   Him ought it to be understood), "Nothing false is said unto the King,
   and nothing false shall proceed out of His mouth." If by King here he
   meant any man, let us prefer Christ the King, to a man-king. But if,
   which is the truer understanding of it, it is Christ of whom he spake,
   if I say, as is the truer understanding of it, it is Christ of whom he
   spake (for to Him indeed nothing false is said, in that He is not
   deceived; from His Mouth nothing false proceedeth, in that He doth not
   lie); let us look how we are to understand the section of the Gospel,
   and let us not make the [3980] pitfall of a lie, as it were, on
   heavenly authority. But it is most absurd to be seeking to explain the
   truth, and to prepare a place for a lie. What art thou teaching me, I
   ask thee, who art explaining this text to me, what wouldest thou teach
   me? I do not know whether you would dare to say, "Falsehood." For if
   you should dare to say this, I turn away mine ears, and fasten them up
   with thorns, that if you should try to force your way, I might through
   their very pricking make away without the explanation of the Gospel.
   Tell me what thou wouldest wish to teach me, and thou hast resolved the
   difficulty. Tell me, I pray thee; lo, here I am; mine ears are open, my
   heart is ready, teach me. But I ask, what? I will not travel through
   many things. What art thou going to teach me? Whatsoever learning thou
   art about to bring forward, whatsoever strength to show in disputation,
   tell me this one thing only, one of two things I ask; art thou going to
   teach me truth or falsehood? What do we suppose he will answer lest one
   depart; lest while he is open-mouthed and making an effort to bring out
   his words, I forthwith leave him: what will he promise but truth? I am
   listening, standing, expecting, most earnestly expecting. See here, he
   who promised that he will teach me truth, insinuates falsehood
   concerning Christ. How then shall he teach truth, who would say that
   Christ is false? If Christ is false, can I hope that thou wilt tell me
   the truth?

   6. Consider again. What does he say? Hath Christ spoken falsely? Where,
   I ask thee? "Where He says, I go not up to the feast day;' and went
   up." For my part, I should wish thoroughly to examine this place, if so
   be we may see that Christ did not speak falsely. Yea rather, seeing
   that I have no doubt that Christ did not speak falsely, I will either
   thoroughly examine this passage and understand it, or, not
   understanding it, I will defer it. Yet that Christ spoke falsely will I
   never say. Grant that I have not understood it; I will depart in my
   ignorance. For better is it with piety to be ignorant, than with
   madness to pronounce judgment. Notwithstanding we are trying to
   examine, if so be by His assistance, who is the Truth, we may find
   something, and be found something ourselves, and this something will
   not be in the Truth a lie. For if in searching I find a lie, I find not
   a something but a nothing. Let us then look where it is thou sayest
   that Christ lied. He will say, "In that He said, I go not up to this
   feast,' and went up." Whence dost thou know that He said so? What if I
   were to say, nay, not I, but any one, for God forbid that I should say
   it; what if another were to say, "Christ did not say this;" whereby
   dost thou refute him, whereby wilt thou prove it? Thou wouldest open
   the book, find the passage, point it out to the man, yea with great
   confidence force the book upon him if he resisted, "Hold it, mark,
   read, it is the Gospel you have in your hands." But why, I ask thee,
   why dost thou so rudely accost [3981] this feeble one? Do not be so
   eager; speak more composedly, more tranquilly. See, it is the Gospel I
   have in my hands; and what is there in it? He answers: "The Gospel
   declares that Christ said what thou deniest." And wilt thou believe
   that Christ said it, because the Gospel declares it? "Decidedly for
   that reason," says he. I marvel exceedingly how thou shouldest say that
   Christ lieth, and the Gospel doth not lie. But lest haply when I speak
   of the Gospel, thou shouldest think of the book itself, and imagine the
   parchment and ink to be the Gospel, see what the Greek word means;
   Gospel is "a good messenger," or "a good message." The messenger then
   doth not lie, and doth He who sent him, lie? This messenger, the
   Evangelist to wit, to give his name also, this John who wrote this, did
   he lie concerning Christ, or say the truth? Choose which you will, I am
   ready to hear you on either side. If he spake falsely, you have no
   means of proving that Christ spake those words. If he said the truth,
   truth cannot flow from the fountain of falsehood. Who is the Fountain?
   Christ: let John be the stream. The stream comes to me, and you say to
   me, "Drink securely;" yea, whereas you alarm me as to the Fountain
   Himself, whereas you tell me there is falsehood in the Fountain, you
   say to me, "Drink securely." What do I drink? What said John, that
   Christ spake falsely? Whence came John? From Christ. Is he who came
   from Him, to tell me truth, when He from whom he came lied? I have read
   in the Gospel plainly, "John lay on the Lord's Breast;" [3982] but I
   conclude that he drank in truth. What saw he as he lay on the Lord's
   Breast? What drank he in? what, but that which he poured forth? "In the
   beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
   God. The Same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by
   Him, and without Him was nothing made. That which was made in Him was
   life, and the Life was the Light of men; And the Light shineth in
   darkness, and the darkness comprehended It not;" [3983] nevertheless It
   shineth, and though I chance to have some obscurity, and cannot
   thoroughly comprehend It, still It shineth. "There was a man sent from
   God, whose name was John; he came to bear witness of the Light, that
   all men through him might believe. He was not the Light:" who? John:
   who? John the Baptist. For of him saith John the Evangelist, "He was
   not the Light;" of whom the Lord saith, "He was a burning, and a
   shining lamp." [3984] But a lamp can be lighted, and extinguished. What
   then? whence drawest thou the distinction? of what place art thou
   enquiring? He to whom the lamp bare witness, "was the True Light."
   [3985] Where John added, "the True," there art thou looking out for a
   lie. But hear still the same Evangelist John pouring forth what he had
   drunk in; "And we beheld," saith he, "His glory." What did he behold?
   what glory beheld he? "The glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father,
   full of grace and truth." [3986] See then, see, if we ought not haply
   to restrain weak or rash disputings, and to presume nothing false of
   the truth, to give to the Lord what is His due; let us give glory to
   the Fountain, that we may fill ourselves securely. "Now God is true,
   but every man a liar." [3987] What is this? God is full; every man is
   empty; if he will be filled, let him come to Him That is full. "Come
   unto Him, and be enlightened." [3988] Moreover, if man is empty, in
   that he is a liar, and he seeks to be filled, and with haste and
   eagerness runs to the fountain, he wishes to be filled, he is empty.
   But thou sayest, "Beware of the fountain, there is falsehood there."
   What else sayest thou, but "there is poison there"?

   7. "You have already," he says, "said all, already have you checked,
   already chastened me. But tell me how He did not speak falsely who
   said, I go not up,' and went up?" I will tell you, if I can; but think
   it no little matter, that if I have not established you in the truth, I
   have yet kept you back from rashness. I will nevertheless tell you,
   what I imagine you know even already, if you remember the words which I
   have set forth to you. The words themselves solve the difficulty. That
   feast was kept for many days. On this, that is this present feast day,
   saith He, this day, that is when they hoped, He went not up; but when
   He Himself resolved to go. Now mark what follows, "When He had said
   these words, He Himself stayed in Galilee." So then He did not go up on
   that feast day. For His brethren wished that He should go first;
   therefore had they said, "Pass from hence into Judæa." They did not
   say, "Let us pass," as though they would be His companions; or, "Follow
   us into Judæa," as though they would go first; but as though they would
   send Him before them. He wished that they should go before; He avoided
   this snare, impressing His infirmity as Man, hiding the Divinity; this
   He avoided, as when He fled into Egypt. [3989] For this was no effect
   of want of power, but even of truth, that He might give an example of
   caution; that no servant of His might say, "I do not fly, because it is
   disgraceful;" when haply it might be expedient to fly. As He was going
   to say to His disciples, "When they have persecuted you in this city,
   flee ye into another;" [3990] He gave them Himself this example. For He
   was apprehended, when He willed; He was born, when He willed. That they
   might not anticipate Him then, and announce that He was coming, and
   plots be prepared; He said, "I go not up to this feast day." [3991] He
   said, "I go not up," that He might be hid; He added "this," that He
   might not lie. Something He expressed, [3992] something He suppressed,
   something He repressed; yet said He nothing false, for "nothing false
   proceedeth out of His Mouth." Finally, after He had said these words,
   "When His brethren were gone up;" [3993] the Gospel declares it,
   attend, read what you have objected to me; see if the passage itself do
   not solve the difficulty, see if I have taken from anywhere else what
   to say. This then the Lord was waiting for, that they should go up
   first, that they might not announce beforehand that He was coming,
   "When His brethren were gone up, then went He also up to the feast day,
   not openly, but as it were in secret." What is, "as it were in secret"?
   He acts there as if in secret. What is, "as it were in secret"? Because
   neither was this really in secret. For He did not really make an effort
   to be concealed, who had it in His Own power when He would be taken.
   But in that concealment, as I have said, He gave His weak disciples,
   who had not the power to prevent being taken when they would not, an
   example of being on their guard against the snares of enemies. For He
   went up afterwards even openly, and taught them in the temple; and some
   said, " Lo, this is He; lo, He is teaching.' Certainly our rulers said
   that they wished to apprehend Him: Lo, He speaketh openly, and no one
   layeth hands on Him.'" [3994]

   8. But now if we turn our attention to ourselves, if we think of His
   Body, how that we are even He. For if we were not He, "Forasmuch as ye
   have done it unto one of the least of Mine, ye have done it unto Me,"
   [3995] would not be true. If we were not He, "Saul, Saul, why
   persecutest thou Me?" [3996] would not be true. So then we are He, in
   that we are His members, in that we are His Body, in that He is our
   Head, in that Whole Christ is both Head and Body. [3997] Peradventure
   then He foresaw us that we were not to keep the feast days of the Jews,
   and this is, "I go not up to this feast day." See neither Christ nor
   the Evangelist lied; of the which two if one must needs choose one, the
   Evangelist would pardon me, I would by no means put him that is true
   before the Truth Himself; I would not prefer him that was sent to Him
   by whom he was sent. But God be thanked, in my judgment what was
   obscure has been laid open. Your piety will aid me before God. Behold,
   I have, as I was best able, resolved the question, both concerning
   Christ and the Evangelist. Hold fast the truth with me as men who love
   it, embrace charity without contention.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3961] Capitulo.

   [3962] John vii. 2.

   [3963] Casas.

   [3964] John vii. 3, 4.

   [3965] John vii. 5.

   [3966] In the Greek it is oupo, nondum, and so in some Latin copies
   (Ben. note); Griesbach and Scholz place ouk in the text, as having the
   authority of the mss. D, K, most Verss., and the Fathers.

   [3967] John vii. 6-8.

   [3968] John vii. 9, 10.

   [3969] Fidem.

   [3970] Prudentiam.

   [3971] Ps. v. 5.

   [3972] Ps. v. 6.

   [3973] Sinus.

   [3974] Vivum.

   [3975] Rustici.

   [3976] Idiotæ.

   [3977] Prudentia.

   [3978] Ecclus. ii. 14, Vulgate (ii. 12, English version).

   [3979] Ps. xii. 2.

   [3980] Voraginem.

   [3981] Conturbas.

   [3982] John xiii. 23.

   [3983] John i. 1, etc.

   [3984] John v. 35.

   [3985] John i. 9.

   [3986] John i. 14.

   [3987] Rom. iii. 4.

   [3988] Ps. xxxiii. 6, Sept. (xxxiv. 5, English version).

   [3989] Matt. ii. 14.

   [3990] Matt. x. 23.

   [3991] John vii. 8.

   [3992] Aliquid intulit, aliquid abstulit, aliquid distulit.

   [3993] John vii. 10.

   [3994] John vii. 25, 26.

   [3995] Matt. xxv. 40.

   [3996] Acts. ix. 4.

   [3997] Eph. i. 22, 23; 1 Cor. xii. 12.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXXIV.

   [CXXXIV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John viii. 31, "If ye abide in my word,
   then are ye truly my disciples," etc.

   1. Ye know well, Beloved, that we all have One Master, and are fellow
   disciples under Him. Nor are we your masters, because we speak to you
   from this higher spot; but He is the Master of all, who dwelleth in us
   all. He just now spake to us all in the Gospel, and said to us, what I
   also am saying to you; but He saith it of us, as well of us as of you.
   "If ye shall continue in My word," not of course in my word who am now
   speaking to you; but in His who spake just now out of the Gospel. "If
   ye shall continue in My word," saith He, "ye are My disciples indeed."
   [3998] To be a disciple, it is not enough to come, but to continue. He
   doth not therefore say, "If ye shall hear My word;" or, "If ye shall
   come to My word;" or, "If ye shall praise My word;" but observe what He
   said, "If ye shall continue in My word, ye are My disciples indeed, and
   ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall free you." [3999] What
   shall we say, Brethren? To continue in the word of God, is it toilsome,
   or is it not? If it be toilsome, look at the great reward; if it be not
   toilsome, thou receivest the reward for nought. Continue we then in Him
   who continueth in us. We, if we continue not in Him, fall; but He if He
   continue not in us, hath not on that account lost an habitation. For He
   skilleth to continue in Himself, who never leaveth Himself. But for
   man, God forbid that he should continue in himself who hath lost
   himself. So then we continue in Him through indigence; He continueth in
   us through mercy.

   2. Now then seeing it hath been set forth what we ought to do, let us
   see what we are to receive. For He hath appointed a work, and promised
   a reward. What is the work? "If ye shall continue in Me." A short work;
   short in description, great in execution. "If ye shall build on the
   Rock." [4000] O how great a thing is this, Brethren, to build on the
   Rock, how great is it! "The floods came, the winds blew, the rain
   descended, and beat upon that house, and it fell not; for it was
   founded upon a rock." [4001] What then is to continue in the word of
   God, but not to yield to any temptations? The reward, what is it? "Ye
   shall know the truth, and the truth shall free you." Bear with me, for
   ye perceive that my voice is feeble; [4002] assist me by your calm
   [4003] attention. Glorious reward! "Ye shall know the truth." Here one
   may haply say, "And what doth it profit me to know the truth?" "And the
   truth shall free you." If the truth have no charms for you, let freedom
   have its charms. In the usage of the Latin tongue, the expression, "to
   be free," is used in two senses; and chiefly we are accustomed to hear
   this word in this sense, that whosoever is free may be understood to
   escape some danger, to be rid of some embarrassment. But the proper
   signification of "to be free," is "to be made free;" just as "to be
   saved," is "to be made safe;" "to be healed," is, "to be made whole;"
   so "to be freed," is "to be made free." Therefore I said, "If the truth
   have no charms for you, let freedom have its charms." This is expressed
   more evidently in the Greek language, nor can it be there understood in
   any other sense. And that ye may know that in no other sense can it be
   understood; when the Lord spake, the Jews answered, "We were never in
   bondage to any man; how sayest thou the Truth shall free you?" [4004]
   That is, "the Truth shall make you free," how sayest thou to us, who
   were never in bondage to any man? "How," say they, "dost Thou promise
   them freedom, who as Thou seest never bare the hard yoke of bondage?"

   3. They heard what they ought; but they did not what they ought. What
   did they hear? Because I said, "The truth shall free you;" ye turned
   your thoughts upon yourselves, that ye are not in bondage to man, and
   ye said, "We were never in bondage to any man. Every one," Jew and
   Greek, rich and poor, the man in authority and private station, the
   emperor and the beggar, "Every one that committeth sin is the servant
   of sin." [4005] "Every one," saith He, "that committeth sin is the
   servant of sin." If men but acknowledge their bondage, they will see
   from whence they may obtain freedom. Some free-born man has been taken
   captive by the barbarians, from a free man is made a slave; another
   hears, and pities him, considers how that he has money, becomes his
   ransomer, goes to the barbarians, gives money, ransoms the man. And he
   has indeed restored freedom, if he have taken away iniquity. But what
   man has ever taken away iniquity from another man? He who was in
   bondage with the barbarians, has been redeemed by his ransomer; and
   great difference there is between the ransomer and the ransomed; yet
   haply are they fellow-slaves under the lordship of iniquity. I ask him
   that was ransomed, "Hast thou sin?" "I have," he says. I ask the
   ransomer, "Hast thou sin?" "I have," he says. So then neither do thou
   boast thyself that thou hast been ransomed, nor thou uplift thyself
   that thou art his ransomer; but fly both of you to the True Deliverer.
   It is but a small part of it, that they who are under sin, are called
   servants; they are even called dead; what a man is afraid of captivity
   bringing upon him, iniquity has brought on him already. For what?
   because they seem to be alive, was He then mistaken who said, "Let the
   dead bury their dead"? [4006] So then all under sin are dead, dead
   servants, dead in their service, servants in their death.

   4. Who then freeth from death and from bondage, save He, who is "Free
   among the dead"? [4007] Who is "Free among the dead," save He who among
   sinners is without sin? "Lo, the prince of the world cometh," saith our
   Redeemer Himself, our Deliverer, "Lo, the prince of the world cometh,
   and shall find nothing in Me." [4008] He holds fast those whom he hath
   deceived, whom he hath seduced, whom he hath persuaded to sin and
   death; "in Me shall he find nothing." Come, Lord, Redeemer come, come;
   let the captive acknowledge thee, him that leadeth captive flee thee;
   be Thou my Deliverer. Lost as I was, He hath found me in Whom the devil
   findeth nothing that cometh of the flesh. The prince of this world
   findeth in Him Flesh, he findeth it but what kind of Flesh? A mortal
   Flesh, which he can seize, which he can crucify, which he can kill.
   Thou art mistaken, O deceiver, the Redeemer is not deceived; thou art
   mistaken. Thou seest in the Lord a mortal Flesh, it is not flesh of
   sin, it is the likeness of flesh of sin. "For God sent His Son in the
   likeness of flesh of sin." True Flesh, mortal Flesh; but not flesh of
   sin. "For God sent His Son in the likeness of flesh of sin, that by sin
   He might condemn sin in the Flesh." [4009] "For God sent His Son in the
   likeness of flesh of sin;" in Flesh, but not in flesh of sin; but "in
   the likeness of flesh of sin." For what purpose? "That by sin," of
   which assuredly there was none in Him, "He might condemn sin in the
   flesh; that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who
   walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit." [4010]

   5. If then it was "the likeness of flesh of sin," not flesh of sin,
   how, "That by sin He might condemn sin in the flesh"? So a likeness is
   wont to receive the name of that thing of which it is a likeness. The
   word man is used for a real man; but if you show a man painted on the
   wall, and enquire what it is, it is answered, "A man." So then Flesh
   having the likeness of flesh of sin, that it might be a sacrifice for
   sin, is called "sin." The same Apostle says in another place, "He made
   Him to be sin for us, who knew no sin." [4011] "Him who knew no sin:"
   Who is He who knew no sin, but He That said, "Behold the prince of the
   world cometh, and shall find nothing in me? [4012] Him who knew no sin,
   made He sin for us;" even Christ Himself, who knew no sin, God made sin
   for us. What does this mean, Brethren? If it were said, "He made sin
   upon Him," or, "He made Him to have sin;" it would seem intolerable;
   how do we tolerate what is said, "He made Him sin," that Christ Himself
   should be sin? They who are acquainted with the Scriptures of the Old
   Testament recognise what I am saying. For it is not an expression once
   used, but repeatedly, very constantly, sacrifices for sins are called
   "sins." A goat, for instance, was offered for sin, a ram, anything; the
   victim itself which was offered for sin was called "sin." A sacrifice
   for sin then was called "sin;" so that in one place the Law says, "That
   the Priests are to lay their hands upon the sin." [4013] "Him" then,
   "who knew no sin, He made sin for us;" that is, "He was made a
   sacrifice for sin." Sin was offered, and sin was cancelled. The Blood
   of the Redeemer was shed, and the debtor's bond was cancelled. This is
   the "Blood, That was shed for many for the remission of sins." [4014]

   6. What meaneth this then thy senseless exultation, O thou that didst
   hold me captive, for that my Deliverer had mortal Flesh? See, if He had
   sin; if thou hast found anything of thine in Him, hold Him fast. "The
   Word was made Flesh." [4015] The Word is the Creator, the Flesh His
   creature. What is there here of thine, O enemy? And the Word is God,
   and His Human [4016] Soul is His creature, and His Human Flesh His
   creature, and the Mortal Flesh of God is His creature. Seek for sin
   here. But what art thou seeking? The Truth saith, "The prince of this
   world shall come, and shall find nothing in Me." [4017] He did not
   therefore not find Flesh, but nothing of his own, that is, no sin. Thou
   didst deceive the innocent, thou madest them guilty. Thou didst slay
   the Innocent; thou destroyedst Him from whom thou hadst nothing due,
   render back what thou didst hold fast. Why then didst thou exult for a
   short hour, because thou didst find in Christ mortal Flesh? It was thy
   trap: whereupon thou didst rejoice, thereby hast thou been taken.
   Wherein thou didst exult that thou hadst found something, therein thou
   sorrowest now that thou hast lost what thou didst possess. Therefore,
   brethren, let us who believe in Christ, continue in His word. For if we
   shall continue in His word, we are His disciples indeed. For not those
   twelve only, but all we who continue in His word are His disciples
   indeed. And "we shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall free us;"
   that is, Christ the Son of God who hath said, "I am the Truth," [4018]
   shall make you free, that is, shall free you, not from barbarians, but
   from the devil; not from the captivity of the body, but from the
   iniquity of the soul. It is He Only who freeth in such wise. Let no one
   call himself free, lest he remain a slave. Our soul shall not remain in
   bondage, for that day by day our debts are forgiven.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [3998] John viii. 31.

   [3999] John viii. 32.

   [4000] Matt. vii. 24.

   [4001] Matt. vii. 25.

   [4002] Obtusam.

   [4003] Tranquillitate.

   [4004] John viii. 33.

   [4005] John viii. 34.

   [4006] Matt. viii. 22.

   [4007] Ps. lxxxviii. 5.

   [4008] John xiv. 30.

   [4009] Rom. viii. 3.

   [4010] Rom. viii. 4.

   [4011] 2 Cor. v. 21.

   [4012] John xiv. 30.

   [4013] Lev. iv. 29, Sept.

   [4014] Matt. xxvi. 28.

   [4015] John i. 14.

   [4016] Hominis.

   [4017] John xiv. 30.

   [4018] John xiv. 6.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXXV.

   [CXXXV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John ix. 4 and 31, "We must work the works
   of him that sent me," etc. Against the Arians. And of that which the
   man who was born blind and received his sight said, "We know that God
   heareth not sinners."

   1. The Lord Jesus, as we heard when the Holy Gospel was being read,
   opened the eyes of a man who was born blind. Brethren, if we consider
   our hereditary punishment, the whole world is blind. And therefore came
   Christ the Enlightener, because the devil had been the Blinder. He made
   all men to be born blind, who seduced the first man. Let them run to
   the Enlightener, let them run, believe, receive the clay made of the
   spittle. The Word is as it were the spittle, the Flesh is the earth.
   Let them wash the face in the pool of Siloa. Now it was the
   Evangelist's place to explain to us what Siloa means, and he said,
   "which is by interpretation, Sent." [4019] Who is This That is Sent,
   but He who in this very Lesson said, "I am come to do the works of Him
   That sent Me." [4020] Lo, Siloa, wash the face, be baptized, that ye
   may be enlightened, and that ye who before saw not, may see.

   2. Lo, first open your eyes to that which is said; "I am come," saith
   He, "to do the works of Him That sent Me." Now here at once stands
   forth the Arian, and says, "Here you see that Christ did not His Own
   works, but the Father's who sent Him." Would he say this, if he saw,
   that is, if he had washed his face in Him who was sent, as it were in
   Siloa? What then dost thou say? "Lo," says he, "Himself said it." What
   said He? "I am come to do the works of Him That sent Me." Are they not
   then His Own? No. What then is that which the Siloa Himself saith, the
   Sent Himself, the Son Himself, the Only Son Himself, whom thou
   complainest of as degenerate? What is that He saith, "All things that
   the Father hath are Mine." [4021] You say that He did the works of
   Another, in that He said, "I must do the works of Him That sent Me." I
   say that the Father had the things of another: I am speaking according
   to your [4022] principles. Why would you object to me that Christ said,
   "I am come to do His works" as if, "not Mine own but His That sent
   Me'"?

   3. I ask Thee, O Lord Christ, resolve the difficulty, put an end to the
   contention. "All things," saith He, "that the Father hath are Mine."
   Are they then not the Father's, if they are Thine? For He doth not say,
   "All things that the Father hath He hath given unto Me;" although, if
   He had said even this, He would have shown His equality. But the
   difficulty is that He said, "All things that the Father hath are Mine."
   If you understand it aright, All things that the Father hath, are the
   Son's; all things that the Son hath, are the Father's. Hear Him in
   another place; "All Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine." [4023] The
   question is finished, as to the things which the Father and the Son
   have: they have them with one consent, do not thou introduce [4024]
   dissension. What He calleth the works of the Father, are His Own works;
   for, "Thine too are Mine," for He speaketh of the works of That Father,
   to whom He said, "All Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine." So then, My
   works are Thine, and Thy works are Mine. "For what things soever the
   Father doeth;" [4025] Himself hath said, the Lord hath said, the
   Only-Begotten hath said, the Son hath said, the Truth hath said. What
   hath He said? "What things soever the Father doeth, these also doeth
   the Son in like manner." Signal expression! signal truth! signal
   equality. "All things that the Father doeth, these doeth the Son also."
   Were it enough to say, "All things that the Father doeth, these doeth
   the Son also"? It is not enough; I add, "in like manner." Why do I add,
   "in like manner"? Because they who do not understand, and who walk with
   eyes not yet open, are wont to say, "The Father doeth them by way of
   command, the Son of obedience, therefore not in like manner." But if in
   like manner, as the One, so the Other; so what things the One, the same
   the Other.

   4. "But," says he, "the Father commands, that the Son may execute."
   Carnal indeed is thy conceit, but without prejudice to the truth, I
   grant it to you. Lo, the Father commands, the Son obeys; is the Son
   therefore not of the same Nature, because the One commands, and the
   Other obeys? Give me two men, father and son; they are two men: he that
   commands is a man; he that obeys is a man; he that commands and he that
   obeys have one and the same nature. Does not he that commands, beget a
   son of his own nature? Does he who obeys, by obeying lose his nature?
   Now take for the present, as you thus take two men, the Father
   commanding, the Son obeying, yet God and God. But the first two
   together are two men, the Latter together is but One God; this is a
   divine miracle. Meanwhile if you would that with you I acknowledge the
   obedience, do you first with me acknowledge the Nature. The Father
   begat That which Himself is. If the Father begat ought else than what
   Himself is, He did not beget a true Son. The Father saith to the Son,
   "From the womb before the day-star, I begat Thee." [4026] What is,
   "before the day-star"? By the day-star times are signified. So then
   before times, before all that is called "before;" before all that is
   not, or before all that is. For the Gospel does not say, "In the
   beginning God made the Word;" as it is said, "In the beginning God made
   the Heaven and the earth;" [4027] or, "In the beginning was the Word
   born;" or, "In the beginning God begat the Word." But what says it? "He
   was, He was, He was." You hear, "He was;" believe. "In the beginning
   was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." [4028]
   So often do ye hear, "Was:" seek not for time, for that He always
   "was." He then who always was, and was always with the Son, for that
   God is able to beget without thee; He said to the Son, "From the womb
   before the day-star I begat Thee." What is from the womb? Had God a
   womb? Shall we imagine that God was fashioned with bodily members? God
   forbid! And why said He, "From the womb," but that it might be
   understood that He begat Him of His Own Substance? So then from the
   womb came forth That which Himself was who begat. For if He who begat
   was one thing, and another came forth out of the womb; it were a
   monster, not a Son.

   5. Therefore let the Son do the works of Him That sent Him, and the
   Father also do the works of the Son. "At all events," you say, "the
   Father wills, the Son executes." Lo, I show, that the Son willeth, and
   the Father executeth. Do you say, "where dost thou show this?" I show
   it at once. "Father, I will." [4029] Now here if I had a mind to cavil,
   lo, the Son commandeth, and the Father executeth. What wilt Thou? "That
   where I am, they may be also with Me." We have escaped, there shall we
   be, where He is; there shall we be, we have escaped. Who can undo the
   "I Will" of the Almighty? You hear the will of His power, hear now the
   power of His will. "As the Father" saith He "raiseth up the dead and
   quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom He will." [4030] "Whom
   He will." Say not, The Son quickeneth them, whom the Father commandeth
   Him to quicken. "He quickeneth whom He will." So then whom the Father
   will, and whom Himself will: because where there is One Power, there is
   One Will. Let us then in a heart blind no more hold fast that the
   Nature of the Father and the Son is One and the Same; because the
   Father is very Father, the Son is very Son. What He is, That did He
   beget: because the Begotten was not degenerate.

   6. There is a something in the words of that man who was blind, which
   may cause perplexity, and peradventure make many who understand them
   not aright despair. For he said amongst the rest of his words, the same
   man whose eyes were opened, "We know that God heareth not sinners."
   [4031] What shall we do, if God heareth not sinners? Dare we pray to
   God if He heareth not sinners? Give me one who may pray: lo, here is
   One to hear. Give me one who may pray, sift thoroughly the human race
   from the imperfect to the perfect. Mount up from the spring to the
   summer; for this we have just chanted. "Thou hast made summer and
   spring;" [4032] that is, "Those who are already spiritual, and those
   who are still carnal hast Thou made;" for so the Son Himself saith,
   "Thine Eyes have seen My imperfect being." [4033] That which is
   imperfect in My Body, Thine Eyes have seen. And what then? Have they
   who are imperfect hope? Undoubtedly they have. Hear what follows; "And
   in Thy Book shall all be written." But perhaps, Brethren, the spiritual
   pray and are heard, because they are not sinners? What then must the
   carnal do? What must they do? Shall they perish? Shall they not pray to
   God? God forbid! Give me that publican in the Gospel. Come, thou
   publican, stand forth, show thy hope, that the weak may not lose hope.
   For behold the publican went up with the Pharisee to pray, and with
   face cast down upon the ground, standing afar off, beating his breast,
   he said, "Lord, be merciful to me a sinner. [4034] And he went down
   justified rather than the Pharisee." Said he true or false, who said,
   "Be merciful to me a sinner"? If he said true, he was a sinner; yet was
   he heard and justified. What then is that, that thou whose eyes the
   Lord opened didst say, "We know that God heareth not sinners"? [4035]
   Lo, God doth hear sinners. But wash thou thy inferior face, let that be
   done in thy heart, which hath been done in thy face; and thou wilt see
   that God doth hear sinners. The imagination of thine heart hath
   deceived thee. There is still something for Him to do to thee. We see
   that this man was cast out of the synagogue; Jesus heard of it, came to
   him, and said to him, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" And He
   said, "Who is He, Lord, that I should believe on Him?" [4036] He saw,
   and did not see; he saw with the eyes, but as yet with the heart he saw
   not. The Lord said to him, "Thou both seest Him," that is, with the
   eyes; "and He that talketh with thee is He. He then fell down, and
   worshipped Him." [4037] Then washed he the face of his heart.

   7. Apply yourselves then earnestly to prayer, ye sinners: confess your
   sins, pray that they may be blotted out, pray that they may be
   diminished, pray that as ye increase, they may decrease: yet do not
   despair, and sinners though ye be, pray. For who hath not sinned? Begin
   with the priests. To the priests it is said, "First offer sacrifices
   for your own sins, and so for the people." [4038] The sacrifices
   convicted the priests that if any one should call himself righteous and
   without sin, it might be answered him, "I look not at what thou sayest,
   but at what thou offerest; thine own victim convicteth thee. Wherefore
   dost thou offer for thine own sins, if thou have no sins? Dost thou in
   thy sacrifice lie unto God?" But peradventure the priests of the
   ancient people were sinners; of the new people are not sinners. Of a
   truth, Brethren, for that God hath so willed, I am His priest; I am a
   sinner; with you do I beat the breast, with you I ask for pardon, with
   you I hope that God will be merciful. But peradventure the Holy
   Apostles, those first and highest leaders [4039] of the flock,
   shepherds, members of The Shepherd, these peradventure had no sin. Yes,
   indeed, even they had, they had indeed; they are not angry at this, for
   they confess it. I should not dare. First hear the Lord Himself saying
   to the Apostles, "In this manner pray ye." [4040] As those other
   priests were convicted by the sacrifices, so these by prayer. And
   amongst the other things which He commanded them to pray for, He
   appointed this also, "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our
   debtors." [4041] What do the Apostles say? Every day they pray for
   their debts to be forgiven them. They come in debtors, they go out
   absolved, and return debtors to prayer. This life is not without sin,
   that as often as prayer is made, so often should sins be forgiven.

   8. But what shall I say? Peradventure when they learnt the prayer, they
   were still weak. Some one, perhaps, will say this. When the Lord Jesus
   taught them that prayer, they were yet babes, weak, carnal; they were
   not yet spiritual, who have no sin. What then, Brethren? When they
   became spiritual, did they cease to pray? Then Christ ought to have
   said, "Pray in such wise now;" and to have given them, when spiritual,
   another prayer. It is one and the same. He who gave it is One and the
   Same; use it then in prayer in the Church. But we will take away all
   controversy, when you say the Holy Apostles were spiritual, up to the
   time of the Lord's Passion they were carnal; this you must say. And
   indeed, the truth is, as He was hanging, they were in alarm, and the
   Apostles then despaired when the robber believed. Peter dared to
   follow, when the Lord was led to suffering, he dared to follow, who
   came to the house, and was wearied in the palace, and stood at the
   fire, and was cold; he stood at the fire, he was frozen with a chilling
   fear. Being questioned by the maid-servant, he denied Christ once;
   being questioned a second time, he denied Him; being questioned a third
   time, he denied Him. [4042] God be thanked, that the questioning
   ceased; if the questioning had not ceased, long would the denial have
   been repeated. So then after He rose again, then He confirmed them,
   then did they become spiritual. Had they at that time then no sin? The
   Apostles spiritual, wrote spiritual epistles, they sent them to the
   Churches; "they had no sin." This you say. I do not believe you, I ask
   themselves. Tell us, O holy Apostles, after the Lord rose again, and
   confirmed you with the Holy Ghost sent from heaven; did ye cease to
   have sin? Tell us, I pray you. Let us hear, that sinners may not
   despair, that they may not leave off to pray to God, because they are
   not without sin. Tell us. One of them saith. And who? He whom the Lord
   loved the most, and who lay on the Lord's Breast, [4043] and drank in
   the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven which he was to pour forth
   again. Him I ask; "Have ye sin or not?" He maketh answer and saith, "If
   we shall say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth
   is not in us." [4044] Now it is the same John who said, "In the
   beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
   God." [4045] See ye what heights he had passed, that he could reach to
   the Word! Such an one, and so great, who like an eagle soared above the
   clouds, who in the serene clearness of his mind saw, "In the beginning
   was the Word;" he hath said, "If we shall say that we have no sin, we
   deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. But if we shall confess
   our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
   cleanse us from all unrighteousness." [4046] Therefore pray ye.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4019] John ix. 7.

   [4020] John ix. 4.

   [4021] John xvi. 15.

   [4022] Cor.

   [4023] John xvii. 10.

   [4024] Litigare.

   [4025] John v. 19.

   [4026] Ps. cix. 3, Sept. (cx. English version).

   [4027] Gen. i. 1.

   [4028] John i. 1.

   [4029] John xvii. 24.

   [4030] John v. 21.

   [4031] John ix. 31.

   [4032] Ps. lxxiii. 17, Sept. (lxxiv. English version).

   [4033] Ps. cxxxviii. 16, Sept. (cxxxix. English version).

   [4034] Luke xviii. 13.

   [4035] Theoph. and Euthym. understand this not thus absolutely, but
   that God does not hear sinners so as to enable them to work miracles,
   the miracle being allowed; St. Hilary applies it to those who continue
   in sin, and whose prayer is not truly prayer, "prayer being not the
   profession of words, but of faith." In Ps. lii. § 13.

   [4036] John ix. 35, 36.

   [4037] John ix. 37, 38.

   [4038] Lev. xvi.; Heb. vii. 27.

   [4039] Arietes.

   [4040] Matt. vi. 9.

   [4041] Matt. vi. 12.

   [4042] Matt. xxvi. 69, etc.

   [4043] John xiii. 23.

   [4044] 1 John i. 8.

   [4045] John i. 1.

   [4046] 1 John i. 9.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXXVI.

   [CXXXVI. Ben.]

   On the same lesson of the Gospel, John ix., on the giving sight to the
   man that was born blind.

   1. We have heard the lesson of the Holy Gospel which we are in the
   habit of hearing; but it is a good thing to be reminded: good to
   refresh the memory from the lethargy of forgetfulness. And in fact this
   very old lesson has given us as much pleasure as if it were new. Christ
   gave sight to one blind from his birth; why do we marvel? Christ is the
   Saviour; by an act of mercy He made up that which He had not given in
   the womb. Now when He gave that man no eyes, it was no mistake of His
   surely; but a delay with a view to a miracle. You are saying, it may
   be, "Whence knowest thou this?" From Himself I have heard it; He just
   now said it; we heard it all together. For when His disciples asked
   Him, and said, "Lord, who did sin, this man or his parents, that he was
   born blind?" [4047] What answer He made, ye, as I did, heard. "Neither
   hath this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the works of God should
   be made manifest in him." [4048] Lo then wherefore it was that He
   delayed when He gave him no eyes. He did not give what He could give,
   He did not give what He knew He should give, when need was. Yet do not
   suppose, Brethren, that this man's parents had no sin, or that he
   himself had not, when he was born, contracted original sin, for the
   remission of which sin infants are baptized unto remission of sins. But
   that blindness was not because of his parents' sin, nor because of his
   own sin; "but that the works of God should be made manifest in him."
   For we all when we were born contracted original sin: and yet we were
   not born blind. However enquire carefully, And we were born blind. For
   who was not born blind? blind, that is, in heart. But the Lord Jesus,
   for that He had created both, cured both.

   2. With the eyes of faith ye have seen this man blind, ye have seen him
   too of blind seeing; but ye have heard him erring. Wherein this blind
   man erred, I will tell you; first, in that he thought Christ a prophet,
   and knew not that He was the Son of God. And then we have heard an
   answer of his entirely false; for he said, "We know that God heareth
   not sinners." [4049] If God heareth not sinners, what hope have we? If
   God heareth not sinners, why do we pray, and publish the record of our
   sin by the beating of the breast? Where again is that Publican, who
   went up with the Pharisee into the temple [4050] and while the Pharisee
   was boasting, parading [4051] his own merits, he standing afar off, and
   with his eyes fastened on the ground, and beating his breast, was
   confessing his sins? And this man, who confessed his sins, went down
   from the temple justified rather than the other Pharisee. Assuredly
   then God doth hear sinners. But he who spake these words had not yet
   washed the face of the heart in Siloa. The sacrament had gone before on
   his eyes; but in the heart had not been yet effected the blessing of
   the grace. When did this blind man wash the face of his heart? When the
   Lord admitted him into Himself after he had been cast out by the Jews.
   For He found him, and said to him as we have heard; "Dost thou believe
   on the Son of God?" And he, "Who is He, Lord, that I may believe on
   Him?" [4052] With the eyes, it is true, he saw already; did he see
   already in the heart? No, not yet. Wait; he will see presently. Jesus
   answered him, "I that speak with thee am He." [4053] Did he doubt? No,
   forthwith he washed his face. For he was speaking with That Siloa,
   "which is by interpretation, Sent." [4054] Who is the Sent, but Christ?
   Who often bare witness, saying, "I do the will of My Father That sent
   Me." [4055] He then was Himself the Siloa. The man approached blind in
   heart, he heard, believed, adored; washed the face, saw.

   3. But they who cast him out continued blind, forasmuch as they
   cavilled at the Lord, that it was the sabbath when He made clay of the
   spittle, and anointed the eyes of the blind man. For when the Lord
   cured with a word, the Jews openly cavilled. For He did no work on the
   sabbath day, when He spake, and it was done. It was a manifest cavil;
   they cavilled at Him merely commanding, they cavilled at Him speaking;
   as if they did not themselves speak all the sabbath day. I might say
   that they do not speak not only on the sabbath, but on no day,
   forasmuch as they have kept back from the praises of the True God.
   Nevertheless, as I have said, brethren, it was a manifest cavil. The
   Lord said to a certain man, "Stretch forth thine hand;" [4056] he was
   made whole, and they cavilled for that He healed on the sabbath day.
   What did He do? what work did He do? what burden did He bear? But in
   this instance, the spitting on the ground, the making clay, and
   anointing the man's eyes, is doing some work. Let no one doubt it, it
   was doing a work. The Lord did break the sabbath; but was not therefore
   guilty. What is that I have said, "He brake the sabbath"? He, the Light
   had come, He was removing the shadows. For the sabbath was enjoined by
   the Lord God, enjoined by Christ Himself, who was with the Father, when
   that Law was given; it was enjoined by Him, but in shadow of what was
   to come. "Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in
   respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days,
   which are a shadow of things to come." [4057] He had now come whose
   coming these things announced. Why do the shadows delight us? Open your
   eyes, ye Jews; the Sun is present. "We know." [4058] What do ye know,
   ye blind in heart? what know ye? "That this man is not of God, because
   he thus breaketh the sabbath day." [4059] The sabbath, unhappy men,
   this very sabbath did Christ ordain, [4060] who ye say is not of God.
   Ye observe the sabbath in a carnal manner, ye have not the spittle of
   Christ. In this earth of the sabbath look also for the spittle of
   Christ, and ye will understand that by the sabbath Christ was
   prophesied. But ye, because ye have not the spittle of Christ in the
   earth upon your eyes, ye have not come unto Siloa, and have not washed
   the face, and have continued blind, blind to the good of this blind
   man, yea now no longer blind either in body or heart. He received clay
   with the spittle, his eyes were anointed, he came to Siloa, he washed
   his face, he believed on Christ, he saw, he continued not in that
   exceedingly fearful judgment; "For judgment I came into this world,
   that they which see not may see, and that they which see may be made
   blind." [4061]

   4. Exceeding alarm! "That they which see not may see:" Good. It is a
   Saviour's office, a profession of healing power, "That they which see
   not may see." But what, Lord, is that Thou hast added, "That they which
   see may be made blind"? If we understand, it is most true, most
   righteous. Yet what is, "They which see"? They are the Jews. Do they
   then see? According to their own words, they see; according to the
   truth, they do not see. What then is, "they see"? They think they see,
   they believe they see. For they believed they did see, when they
   maintained the Law against Christ. "We know;" therefore they see. What
   is "We know," but we see? What is, "this Man is not of God, because He
   thus breaketh the sabbath day"? They see; they read what the Law said.
   For it was enjoined that whosoever should break the sabbath day, should
   be stoned. [4062] Therefore said they that He was not of God; but
   though seeing, they were blind to this, that for judgment He came into
   the world who is to be the Judge of quick and dead; why came He? "That
   they which see not may see:" that they who confess that they do not
   see, may be enlightened. "And that they which see may be made blind;"
   that is, that they who confess not their own blindness, may be the more
   hardened. And, in fact, "That they which see may be made blind," has
   been fulfilled; the defenders of the Law, Doctors [4063] of the Law,
   the teachers of the Law, the understanders of the Law, crucified the
   Author of the Law. O blindness, this is that which "in part hath
   happened to Israel." [4064] That Christ might be crucified, and the
   fulness of the Gentiles might come in, "blindness in part hath happened
   to Israel." What is, "that they which see not may see"? That the
   fulness of the Gentiles might come in, "blindness in part hath happened
   to Israel." The whole world lay in blindness; but He came, "that they
   which see not may see, and that they which see may be made blind." He
   was disowned by the Jews, He was crucified by the Jews; of His Blood He
   made an eye-salve for the blind. They who boasted that they saw the
   light, being more hardened, being made blind, crucified the Light. What
   great blindness? They killed the Light, but the Light Crucified
   enlightened the blind.

   5. Hear one seeing, who once was blind. Behold, against what a cross
   they have miserably stumbled, who would not confess their blindness to
   the Physician! The Law had continued with them. What serveth the Law
   without grace? Unhappy men, what can the Law do without grace? What
   doeth the earth without the spittle of Christ? What doeth the Law
   without grace, but make them more guilty? Why? Because hearers of the
   Law and not doers, and hereby sinners, transgressors. The son of the
   hostess of the man of God was dead, and his staff was sent by his
   servant, and laid upon his face, [4065] but he did not revive. What
   doeth the Law without grace? What saith the Apostle, now seeing, now of
   blind, enlightened? "For if there had been a Law given which could give
   life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law." [4066] Take
   heed; let us answer and say; what is this that he hath said? "If there
   had been a Law given which could give life, verily righteousness should
   have been by the Law." If it could not give life, why was it given? He
   went on and added, "But the Scripture hath concluded all under sin,
   that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
   that believe." [4067] That the promise of illumination, the promise of
   love by the faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe,
   that Scripture, that is the Law, hath concluded all under sin. What is,
   "hath concluded all under sin"? "I had not known concupiscence, except
   the Law had said, Thou shalt not lust." [4068] What is, "hath concluded
   all under sin"? Hath made the sinner a transgressor also. For it could
   not heal the sinner. "It hath concluded all under sin;" but with what
   hope? The hope of grace, the hope of mercy. Thou hast received the Law:
   thou didst wish to keep it, thou wast not able; thou hast fallen from
   pride, hast seen thy weakness. Run to the Physician, wash the face.
   Long for Christ, confess Christ, believe on Christ; the Spirit is added
   to the letter, and thou wilt be saved. For if thou take away the Spirit
   from the letter, "the letter killeth;" if it kill, where is hope? "But
   the Spirit giveth life." [4069]

   6. Let then Gehazi, Elisha's servant, receive the staff, as Moses the
   servant of God received the Law. Let him receive the staff, receive it,
   run, go before, anticipate him, lay the staff upon the face of the dead
   child. And so it was; he did receive it, he ran, he laid the staff upon
   the face of the dead child. But to what purpose? what serveth the
   staff? "If there had been a Law given which could give life," the boy
   might have been raised to life by the staff; but seeing that "the
   Scripture hath concluded all under sin," he still lies dead. But why
   hath it concluded all under sin? "That the promise by the faith of
   Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe." Let then Elisha
   come, who sent the staff by the servant to prove that he was dead; let
   him come himself, come in his own person, himself enter into the
   woman's house, go up to the child, find him dead, conform himself to
   the members of the dead child, himself not dead, but living. For this
   he did; he laid his face upon his face, his eyes upon his eyes, his
   hands upon his hands, his feet upon his feet, he straitened, he
   contracted himself, being great, he made himself little. He contracted
   himself; so to say, he lessened himself. "For being in the Form of God,
   He emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant." [4070] What is He
   conformed Himself, alive to the dead? Do ye ask, what this is? Hear the
   Apostle; "God sent His Son." [4071] What is, he conformed himself to
   the dead? Let him tell this, let him go on and declare it again; "In
   the likeness of flesh of sin." This is to conform Himself Alive to the
   dead; to come to us in the likeness of flesh of sin, not in the flesh
   of sin. Man lay dead in a flesh of sin, the likeness of flesh of sin
   conformed Himself to him. For He died who had not wherefore to die. He
   died, Alone "Free among the dead;" forasmuch as the whole flesh of men
   was indeed a flesh of sin. And how should it rise again, had not He who
   had no sin, conforming Himself to the dead, come in the likeness of
   flesh of sin? O Lord Jesus, who hast suffered for us, not for Thyself,
   who hadst no guilt, and didst endure its punishment, that thou mightest
   dissolve at once the guilt and punishment.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4047] John ix. 2.

   [4048] John ix. 3.

   [4049] John ix. 31.

   [4050] Luke xviii. 10.

   [4051] Ventilante.

   [4052] John ix. 35, 36.

   [4053] John ix. 37.

   [4054] John ix. 7.

   [4055] John iv. 34, v. 30, vi. 38.

   [4056] Matt. xii. 13.

   [4057] Col. ii. 16, 17.

   [4058] John ix. 24.

   [4059] John ix. 16.

   [4060] Prædicavit.

   [4061] John ix. 39.

   [4062] Num. xv. 36.

   [4063] Tractatores.

   [4064] Rom. xi. 25.

   [4065] 2 Kings iv. 29.

   [4066] Gal. iii. 21.

   [4067] Gal. iii. 22.

   [4068] Rom. vii. 7.

   [4069] 2 Cor. iii. 6.

   [4070] Phil. ii. 6.

   [4071] Rom. viii. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXXVII.

   [CXXXVII. Ben.]

   The tenth chapter of the Gospel of John. Of the shepherd, and the
   hireling, and the thief.

   1. Your faith, dearly beloved, is not ignorant, and I know that ye have
   so learnt by the teaching of that Master from heaven, in whom ye have
   placed your hope, that our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath now suffered for
   us and risen again, is the Head of the Church, and the Church is His
   Body, and that in His Body the unity of the members and the bond of
   charity is, as it were, its sound health. But whosoever groweth cold in
   charity, is become enfeebled in the Body of Christ. But He who hath
   already exalted our Head, is able also to make even the feeble members
   whole; provided, that is, that they be not cut off by excessive
   impiety, but adhere to the Body until they be made whole. For
   whatsoever yet adhereth to the body, is not beyond hope of healing;
   whereas that which hath been cut off, can neither be in process of
   curing, nor be healed. Since then He is the Head of the Church, and the
   Church is His Body, Whole Christ is both the Head and the Body. He hath
   already risen again. We have therefore the Head in heaven. Our Head
   intercedeth for us. Our Head without sin and without death, now
   propitiateth God for our sins; that we too at the end rising again, and
   changed into heavenly glory, may follow our Head. For where the Head
   is, there are the rest of the members also. But whilst we are here, we
   are members; let us not despair, for we shall follow our Head.

   2. For consider, Brethren, the love of this our Head. He is now in
   heaven, yet doth He suffer here, as long as His Church suffereth here.
   Here Christ is hungered, here He is athirst, is naked, is a stranger,
   is sick, is in prison. For whatsoever His Body suffereth here, He hath
   said that Himself suffereth; and at the end, severing off this His Body
   to the right hand, and severing the rest by whom He is now trodden
   under foot to the left, He will say to those on the right hand, "Come,
   ye blessed of My Father, receive the kingdom which hath been prepared
   for you from the beginning of the world." For what deservings? "For I
   was an hungred, and ye gave Me meat;" and so He goes over the rest, as
   if He had Himself received; to such a degree that they, not
   understanding it, make answer and say, "Lord, when saw we Thee an
   hungred, a stranger, and in prison?" And He saith to them, "Forasmuch
   as ye have done it to one of the least of Mine, ye have done it unto
   Me." [4072] So also in our own body, the head is above, the feet are on
   the earth; yet in any crowding and throng of men, when any one treads
   on your foot, does not the head say, "You are treading upon me?" No one
   has trodden on your head, or on your tongue; it is above, in safety, no
   harm has happened unto it; and yet because by the bond of charity there
   is unity from the head even to the feet, the tongue does not separate
   itself therefrom, but says, "You are treading upon me;" when no one has
   touched it. As then the tongue, which no one has touched, says, "You
   are treading upon me;" so Christ, the Head, which no one treadeth on,
   said, "I was an hungred, and ye gave Me meat." And to them who did not
   so, He said, "I was an hungred, and ye gave Me no meat." And how did He
   finish? Thus; "These shall go into everlasting burning, but the
   righteous into life eternal."

   3. When our Lord then was speaking on this occasion, He said, that He
   is "the Shepherd," He said also that He is "the Door." You find them
   both in that place, both "I am the Door" and "I am the Shepherd."
   [4073] In the Head He is the Door, the Shepherd in the Body. For He
   saith to Peter, in whom singly He formeth the Church; "Peter, lovest
   thou Me?" He answered, "Lord, I do love Thee." "Feed My sheep." And a
   third time, "Peter, lovest thou Me?" [4074] "Peter was grieved because
   He asked him the third time;" as though He who saw the conscience of
   the denier, saw not the confessor's faith. He had known him always, had
   known him even when Peter had not known himself. For he did not know
   himself at that time when he said, "I will be with Thee even unto
   death;" [4075] and how infirm he was he knew not. Just as it constantly
   happens in fact to invalids, that the sick man knows not what is going
   on within him, but the physician knows; when yet the former is
   suffering from the very sickness, and the physician is not. The
   physician can better tell what is going on in another, than he who is
   sick what is going on in himself. Peter then was at that time the
   invalid, and the Lord the Physician. The former declared that he had
   strength, when he had not; but the Lord touching the pulse of his
   heart, declared that he should deny Him thrice. And so it came to pass,
   as the Physician foretold, not as the sick presumed. Therefore, after
   His resurrection the Lord questioned him, not as being ignorant with
   what a heart he would confess the love of Christ, but that he might by
   a threefold confession of love, efface the threefold denial of fear.

   4. Therefore doth the Lord require this of Peter, "Peter, lovest thou
   Me?" As though, "What wilt thou give Me, what wilt thou do for Me,
   seeing that thou lovest Me?" What was Peter to do for his Lord risen
   again, and going into heaven, and sitting on the right hand of the
   Father? As if He had said, "This shalt thou give Me, this shalt thou do
   for Me, if thou lovest Me, feed My sheep; enter in by the Door, not go
   up by another way." Ye heard when the Gospel was being read, "He that
   entereth in by Door, is the shepherd; but he that goeth up another way,
   is a thief and a robber; and he seeketh to disperse, and to scatter,
   and to spoil." [4076] Who is he that entereth in by the Door? He that
   entereth in by Christ. Who is he? He who imitateth the Passion of
   Christ, who acknowledgeth the Humility of Christ; that whereas God was
   made Man for us, man may acknowledge himself to be, not God, but man.
   For whoso wisheth to appear God, when he is man, doth not imitate Him,
   who, being God, was made Man. But to thee it is not said, Be anything
   less than thou art; but acknowledge what thou art. Acknowledge thyself
   feeble, acknowledge thyself man, acknowledge thyself a sinner;
   acknowledge that it is He That justifieth, acknowledge that thou art
   full of stains. Let the stain of thine heart appear in thy confession,
   and thou shalt belong to Christ's flock. For the confession of sins
   invites the physician's healing; as in sickness, he that says, "I am
   well," seeketh not the physician. Did not the Pharisee and the Publican
   go up to the temple? [4077] The one boasted of his sound estate, the
   other showed his wounds to the Physician. For the Pharisee said, "I
   thank Thee, O God, that I am not as this publican." [4078] He gloried
   over the other. So then if that publican had been whole, the Pharisee
   would have grudged it him; for that he would not have had any one over
   whom to extol himself. In what state then had he come, who had this
   envious spirit? Surely he was not whole; and whereas he called himself
   whole, he went not down cured. But the other casting his eyes down to
   the ground, and not daring to lift them up unto heaven, smote his
   breast, saying, "God be merciful to me a sinner." [4079] And what saith
   the Lord? "Verily I say unto you, that the publican went down from the
   temple justified rather than the Pharisee. For every one that exalteth
   himself shall be abased, and he that humbleth himself shall be
   exalted." [4080] They then who exalt themselves, would go up into the
   sheepfold by another way; but they who humble themselves, enter in by
   the Door into the sheepfold. Therefore said He of the one, "he entereth
   in;" of the other, "he goeth up." He that goeth up, you see, who seeks
   exaltation, does not enter in, but falls. Whereas he that abases
   himself, that he may enter in by the Door, falls not, but is the
   shepherd.

   5. But the Lord mentioned three characters, [4081] and our duty is to
   search them out in the Gospel, that of the shepherd, the hireling, and
   the thief. I suppose you took notice when the lesson was being read,
   that He marked out the shepherd, the hireling, and the thief. "The
   Shepherd," said He, "layeth down His life for the sheep," [4082] and
   entereth in by the door. [4083] The thief and the robber, said He, go
   up by another way. [4084] "The hireling," He said, if he seeth a wolf
   or even a thief, "fleeth; because he careth not for the sheep;" [4085]
   for he is an hireling, not a shepherd. The one entereth in by the door,
   because he is the shepherd; the second goeth up another way, because he
   is a thief; the third seeing them who wish to spoil the sheep feareth
   and fleeth, because he is an hireling, because he careth not for the
   sheep; for he is an hireling. If we shall find these three characters,
   ye have found, holy brethren, both those whom ye should love, and those
   whom ye should tolerate, and those of whom ye must beware. The Shepherd
   is to be loved, the hireling is to be tolerated, of the robber must we
   beware. There are men in the Church of whom the Apostle speaks, who
   preach the Gospel by occasion, seeking of men their own advantage,
   whether of money, or of honour, or human praise. [4086] They preach the
   Gospel, wishing to receive rewards in whatsoever way they can, and seek
   not so much his salvation to whom they preach, as their own advantage.
   But he who heareth the word of salvation from him who hath not
   salvation, if he believe Him whom he preacheth, and put not his hope in
   him, by whom salvation is preached to him; he that preacheth shall have
   loss; he to whom he preacheth shall have gain.

   6. You have the Lord saying of the Pharisees, "They sit in Moses'
   seat." [4087] The Lord did not mean them only; as if He would send
   those who should believe on Christ to the school of the Jews, that they
   might learn there wherein is the way to the kingdom of heaven. Did not
   the Lord come for this end, that He might establish a Church, and
   separate those Jews who had a good faith, and a good hope, and a good
   love, as wheat from the chaff, and might make them one wall of the
   circumcision, to which should be joined another wall from the
   uncircumcision of the Gentiles, of which two walls coming from
   different directions, Himself should be the Corner-Stone? Did not the
   same Lord therefore say of these two people who were to be one, "And
   other sheep I have, which are not of this fold"? Now He was speaking to
   the Jews; "Them also," said He, "must I bring, that there may be one
   fold, and One Shepherd." [4088] Therefore there were two ships [4089]
   out of which He had called His disciples. They figured these two
   people, when they let down their nets, and took up so great a draught
   [4090] and so large a number of fishes, that the nets were almost
   broken. "And they laded," it is said, "both the ships." The two ships
   figured the One Church, but made out of two peoples, joined together in
   Christ, though coming from different parts. Of this too the two wives,
   who had one husband Jacob, Leah and Rachel, are a figure. [4091] Of
   these two, the two blind men also are a figure, who sat by the way
   side, to whom the Lord gave sight. [4092] And if ye pay attention to
   the Scriptures, ye will find the two Churches, which are not two but
   One, figured out in many places. For to this end the Corner-Stone
   serveth, for to make of two One. To this end serveth That Shepherd, for
   to make of two flocks One. So then the Lord who was to teach the
   Church, and to have a school of His Own beyond the Jews, as we see at
   present, would He be likely to send those who believe on Him unto the
   Jews, to learn? But under the name of the Scribes and Pharisees He
   intimated that there would be some in His Church who would say and not
   do; but, in the person of Moses He designated Himself. For Moses
   represented Him, and for this reason did he put a vail before him, when
   he was speaking to the people; because as long as they were in the law
   given up to carnal joys and pleasures, and looking for an earthly
   kingdom, a vail was put upon their face, that they should not see
   Christ in the Scriptures. For when the vail was taken away, after that
   the Lord had suffered, the secrets of the temple were discovered.
   Accordingly when He was hanging on the Cross, the vail of the temple
   was rent from the top even to the bottom; [4093] and the Apostle Paul
   says expressly, "But when thou shalt turn to Christ, the vail shall be
   taken away." [4094] Whereas with him who turneth not to Christ, though
   he read the law of Moses, the vail is laid upon his heart, as the
   Apostle says. When the Lord then would signify beforehand that there
   would be some such in His Church, what did He say? "The Scribes and
   Pharisees sit in Moses' seat. What they say, do; but do not what they
   do." [4095]

   7. When wicked clerics hear this which is said against them, they would
   pervert it. For I have heard that some do wish to pervert this
   sentence. Would they not, if they might, efface it from the Gospel? But
   because they cannot efface it, they go about to pervert it. But the
   grace and mercy of the Lord is present, and allows them not to do so;
   for He hath hedged round all His declarations [4096] with His truth,
   and in such wise balanced them; that if any one would wish to cut off
   anything from them, or to introduce anything by a bad reading or
   interpretation, any right hearted man may join to the Scripture what
   has been cut off from the Scripture, and read what went above or below,
   and he will find the sense which the other wished to interpret wrongly.
   What then, think ye, do they say of whom it is said, "Do what they
   say"? That it is (and in truth it is so) addressed to laymen. For what
   does the layman who wishes to live well say to himself, when he takes
   notice of a wicked cleric? "The Lord said, What they say, do; what they
   do, do not.' Let me walk in the way of the Lord, not follow this man's
   conversation. Let me hear from him not his words, but God's. I will
   follow God, let him follow his own lust. For if I should wish to defend
   myself in such wise before God as to say, Lord, I saw that thy cleric
   living evilly, and therefore I lived evilly;' would He not say to me,
   Thou wicked servant, hadst thou not heard from Me, "What they say, do,
   but what they do, do not"?' But a wicked layman, an unbeliever, who
   belongs not to Christ's flock, who belongs not to Christ's wheat, who
   as chaff is only borne with in the floor, what does he say to himself
   when the word of God begins to reprove him? "Away; why talkest thou to
   me? The very Bishops and Clergy do not do it, and dost thou force me to
   do it?" Thus he seeks for himself not a patron for his bad cause, but a
   companion for punishment. For will that wicked one whosoever he be that
   he has chosen to imitate, will he ever defend him in the day of
   judgment? For as with all whom the devil seduces, he seduces them not
   to be partakers of a kingdom, but of his damnation; so all who follow
   the wicked, seek companions for themselves to hell, not protection unto
   the kingdom of heaven.

   8. How then do they pervert this declaration when it is said to them in
   their wicked lives, "With good reason was it said by the Lord ,What
   they say, do; what they do, do not'"? "It was well said," say they.
   "For it was said to you, that ye should do what we say; but that ye
   should not do what we do. For we offer sacrifice, you may not." See the
   cunning craftiness of these men; what shall I call them? hirelings. For
   if they were shepherds, they would not say such things. Therefore the
   Lord, that He might shut their mouths, went on, and said, "They sit in
   Moses' seat; what they say, do; but what they do, do not; for they say,
   and do not." [4097] What is it then, Brethren? If He had spoken of
   offering sacrifice; would He have said, "For they say, and do not"? For
   they do offer [4098] sacrifice, they do offer unto God. What is it that
   they say, and do not? Hear what follows; "For they bind heavy burdens,
   and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders, and they
   themselves will not touch them with one of their fingers." [4099] So
   openly did He rebuke, describe, and point them out. But those men when
   they thus wish to pervert the passage, show plainly that they seek
   nothing in the Church but their own advantage; and that they have not
   read the Gospel; for had they known but this very page, and read the
   whole, they would never have dared to say this.

   9. But attend to a more clear proof that the Church hath such as these.
   Lest any one should say to us, "He spake entirely of the Pharisees, He
   spake of the Scribes, He spake of the Jews; for the Church hath none
   such." Who then are they of whom the Lord saith, "Not every one that
   saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven"?
   [4100] And He added, "Many shall say to Me in that day, Lord, Lord,
   have we not prophesied in Thy Name, and in Thy Name done many mighty
   [4101] works, [4102] and in Thy Name have eaten and drunken?" What! do
   the Jews do these things in Christ's name? Assuredly it is manifest,
   that He speaks of them who have the Name of Christ. But what follows?
   "Then will I say to them, I never knew you; depart from Me, all ye that
   work iniquity." [4103] Hear the Apostle sighing concerning such as
   these. He says that some preach the Gospel "through charity," others
   "by occasion;" of whom he says, "They do not preach the Gospel
   rightly." [4104] A right thing, but themselves not right. What they
   preach is right; but they who preach it are not right. Why is he not
   right? Because he seeketh something else in the Church, seeketh not
   God. If he sought God, he would be chaste; for the soul hath in God her
   lawful husband. Whosoever seeketh from God ought besides God, doth not
   seek God chastely. Consider, Brethren; if a wife love her husband
   because he is rich, she is not chaste. For she loves not her husband,
   but her husband's gold. Whereas if she love her husband, she loves him
   both in nakedness and poverty. For if she love him because he is rich;
   what if (as human chances are) he be [4105] outlawed and all on a
   sudden be reduced to need? She gives him up, mayhap; because what she
   loved was not her husband, but his property. But if she love her
   husband indeed, she loves him even more when poor; for that she loves
   with pity too.

   10. And yet, Brethren, our God never can be poor. He is rich, He made
   all things, heaven and earth, the sea and Angels. In the heaven,
   whatsoever we see, whatsoever we see not, He made it. But
   notwithstanding, we ought not to love these riches, but Him who made
   them. For He hath promised thee nothing but Himself. Find anything more
   precious, and He will give thee this. Beauteous is the earth, the
   heaven, and the Angels; but more beauteous is He who made them. They
   then who preach God, as loving God; who preach God, for God's sake,
   feed the sheep, and are no hirelings. This chastity did our Lord Jesus
   Christ require of the soul, when He said to Peter, "Peter, lovest thou
   Me"? [4106] What is "Lovest thou Me"? Art thou chaste? Is not thine
   heart adulterous? Dost thou seek not thine own things in the Church,
   but Mine? If then thou be such an one, and lovest Me, "feed My sheep."
   For thou shalt be no hireling, but thou shalt be a shepherd.

   11. But they did not preach chastely, concerning whom the Apostle
   sighs. But what doth he say? "What then? Notwithstanding every way,
   whether by occasion or in truth, Christ is preached." [4107] He suffers
   then that hirelings there should be. The shepherd preacheth Christ in
   truth, the hireling by occasion preacheth Christ, seeking something
   else. Notwithstanding, both the one and the other preacheth Christ.
   Hear the voice of the shepherd Paul; "Whether by occasion or in truth,
   Christ is preached." Himself a shepherd, he was pleased to have the
   hireling. For they act where they are able, they are useful as far as
   they are able. But when the Apostle for other uses sought for those
   whose ways the weak ones might imitate; he saith, "I have sent unto you
   Timotheus, who shall bring you into remembrance of my ways." [4108] And
   what doth he say? "I have sent unto you a shepherd, to bring you into
   remembrance of my ways;" that is, who himself also walketh as I walk.
   And in sending this shepherd, what doth he say? "For I have no one so
   likeminded, who with sincere affection is anxious for you." Were there
   not many with him? But what follows? "For all seek their own, not the
   things which are Jesus Christ's;" [4109] that is, "I have wished to
   send unto you a shepherd; for there are many hirelings; but it were not
   meet for an hireling to be sent." An hireling is sent for the
   transaction of other affairs and business; but for those which Paul
   then desired, a shepherd was necessary. And he scarcely found one
   shepherd among many hirelings; for the shepherds are few, the hirelings
   many. But what is said of the hirelings? "Verily I say unto you, they
   have received their reward." [4110] Of the shepherd, what saith the
   Apostle? "But whosoever shall cleanse himself from such as these shall
   be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and useful to the Lord, prepared
   always unto every good work." [4111] Not unto certain things prepared,
   and unto certain not prepared, but "unto every good work prepared." So
   much have I said, concerning the shepherds.

   12. But we will now speak of the hirelings. "The hireling when he seeth
   the wolf lying in wait for the sheep, fleeth." This the Lord said. Why?
   "Because he careth not for the sheep." [4112] So long then is the
   hireling of use, as he seeth not the wolf coming, as he seeth not the
   thief and the robber; but when he seeth them, he fleeth. And who is
   there of the hirelings, who fleeth not from the Church, when he seeth
   the wolf and the robber? And wolves and robbers abound. They are they
   who go up by another way. Who are these who go up? They who of Donatus'
   way [4113] wish to make havoc of Christ's sheep, they go up by another
   way. They do not enter in by Christ, because they are not humble.
   Because they are proud, they go up. What is, "they go up"? They are
   lifted up. Whereby do they go up? By another way: whence they wish to
   be named from their way. They who are not in unity are of another way,
   and by this way they go up, that is, are lifted up, and wish to spoil
   the sheep. Now mark how they go up. "It is we," they say, "who
   sanctify, we justify, we make righteous." See whither they have got up.
   "But he that exalteth himself, shall be abased." [4114] Our Lord God is
   able to abase them. Now the wolf is the devil, he lieth in wait to
   deceive, and they that follow him; for it is said that "they are
   clothed indeed with the skins of sheep, but inwardly they are ravening
   wolves." [4115] If the hireling observe anyone indulging in wicked
   talking, or in sentiments to the deadly hurt of his soul, or doing
   ought that is abominable and unclean, and notwithstanding that he seems
   to bear a character of some importance in the Church (from which if he
   hopes for advantage he is an hireling); says nothing, and when he sees
   the man perishing in his sin, sees the wolf following him, sees his
   throat dragged by his teeth to punishment; says not to him, "Thou
   sinnest;" does not chide him, lest he lose his own advantage. This I
   say is, "When he seeth the wolf, he fleeth;" he does not say to him,
   "Thou art doing wickedly." This is no flight of the body, but of the
   soul. He whom thou seest standing still in body flies in heart, when he
   sees a sinner, and does not say to him, "Thou sinnest;" yea when he
   even is in concert with him.

   13. My Brethren, does ever either Presbyter or Bishop come up here, and
   say anything from this higher place, but that the property of others
   must not be plundered, that there must be no fraud committed, no
   wickedness done? They cannot say ought else who sit in Moses' seat,
   [4116] and it is it that speaks by them, not they themselves. What then
   is, "Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?" and, "Every
   tree is known by his fruit"? [4117] Can a Pharisee speak good things? A
   Pharisee is a thorn; how from a thorn do I gather grapes? Because Thou,
   Lord, hast said, "What they say, do; but what they do, do not." [4118]
   Dost Thou bid me gather grapes of thorns when Thou sayest, "Do men
   gather grapes of thorns"? The Lord answereth thee, "I have not bidden
   thee gather grapes of thorns: but look, mark well, if haply, as is
   often the case, the vine when it trails all along upon the ground, be
   not entangled in thorns." For we sometimes find this, my Brethren, a
   vine planted over sedge, how it has there a thorny hedge, and throws
   out its branches, and entangles them in the thorny hedge, and the grape
   hangs among the thorns; and he that sees it plucks the grape, yet not
   from the thorns, but from the vine which is entangled in the thorns. In
   like manner then the Pharisees are thorny; but by sitting in Moses'
   seat, the vine wraps them round, and grapes, that is, good words, good
   precepts, hang from them. Do thou pick the grape, the thorn will not
   prick thee, when thou readest, "What they say, do; but what they do, do
   not." But the thorn will prick thee, if thou do what they do. So then
   that thou mayest gather the grape, and not be caught in the thorns,
   "What they say, do; but what they do, do not." Their deeds are the
   thorns, their words are the grapes, but from the vine, that is, from
   Moses' seat.

   14. These then flee, when they see the wolf, when they see the robber.
   Now this it was that I had began to say, that from this higher place
   they can say nothing, but, "Do well," "do not forswear yourselves,"
   "defraud not," "cheat not any." But sometimes men's lives are so bad,
   that counsel is asked of a Bishop on the taking away of another man's
   estate, and from him is such counsel sought. It has sometimes happened
   to ourselves, we speak from experience: for we should not have believed
   it. Many men require from us evil counsels, counsels of lying, of
   fraud; thinking that they please us thereby. But by the Name of Christ,
   if what we are saying is pleasing to the Lord, no such man has tempted
   us, and found what he wished in us. For with the good pleasure of Him
   who hath called us, we are shepherds, not hirelings. But as saith the
   Apostle, "But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged
   of you, or of man's day; yea, I judge not even mine own self. For I am
   conscious of nothing by myself, but I am not hereby justified. But He
   That judgeth me is the Lord." [4119] My conscience is not therefore
   good, because ye praise it. For how praise ye what ye do not see? Let
   Him praise, who seeth; yea let Him correct, if He seeth ought there
   which offendeth His Eyes. For I too do not say that I am perfectly
   whole; but I beat my breast, and say to God, "Be merciful, that I sin
   not." Yet I do think, for I speak in His Presence, that I seek nothing
   from you, but your salvation; and constantly do I groan over the sins
   of my brethren, and I suffer distress, [4120] and am tormented in mind,
   and often do I reprove them; yea, I never cease reproving them. All who
   remember what I say are witnesses, how often my brethren who sin have
   been reproved, and earnestly reproved, by me.

   15. I am now treating of my counsel with you, holy Brethren. In
   Christ's Name ye are the people of God, ye are a Catholic people, ye
   are members of Christ; ye are not divided from unity. Ye are in
   communion with the members of the Apostles, ye are in communion with
   the memories of the Holy Martyrs, who are spread over the whole world,
   and ye belong to my cure, that I may render a good account of you. Now
   my whole account, what it is ye know. "Lord, Thou knowest that I have
   spoken, Thou knowest that I have not kept silence, Thou knowest in what
   spirit I have spoken, Thou knowest that I have wept before Thee, when I
   spake, and was not heard." This I imagine is my whole account. For the
   Holy Spirit by the prophet Ezekiel hath given me sure hope. Ye know
   this passage concerning the watchman; "O son of man," saith He, "I have
   set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel; if when I say unto the
   wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt die the death, thou dost not speak;"
   that is (for I speak to thee that thou mayest speak), "if thou dost not
   announce it, and the sword," that is, what I have threatened on the
   sinner, "come, and take him away; that wicked man indeed shall die in
   his iniquity; but his blood will I require at the watchman's hand."
   [4121] Why? Because he did not speak. "But if the watchman see the
   sword coming, and blow the trumpet," that he may fly, and he took not
   to himself, that is, amend not himself, that it find him not in the
   punishment which God threateneth, and "the sword shall come and take
   any one away; that wicked man indeed shall die in his iniquity; but
   thou," saith He, "hast delivered thine own soul." And in that place of
   the Gospel, what else saith He to the servant? when he said, "Lord, I
   knew Thee to be a" difficult [4122] or "hard Man, in that Thou reapest
   where Thou hast not sowed, and gatherest where Thou hast not strawed;
   and I was afraid, and went and hid Thy talent in the earth, lo, Thou
   hast that is Thine." And He said, "Thou wicked and slothful servant,'
   because thou knewest Me to be a difficult and hard Man, to reap where I
   have not sown, and to gather where I have not strawed, My very
   covetousness ought the more to teach thee, that I look for profit from
   My money. Thou oughtest therefore to have given My money to the
   exchangers, and at My coming I should have required Mine own with
   usury.'" [4123] Did He say, "Thou oughtest to give, and require"? It is
   we then, Brethren, who give, He will come to require. Pray ye, that He
   may find us prepared.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4072] Matt. xxv. 34, etc.

   [4073] John x. 7, 11.

   [4074] John xxi. 15, etc.

   [4075] Luke xxii. 33.

   [4076] John x. 1, etc.

   [4077] Luke xviii. 10.

   [4078] Luke xviii. 11.

   [4079] Luke xviii. 13.

   [4080] Luke xviii. 14.

   [4081] Personas.

   [4082] John x. 11.

   [4083] John x. 2.

   [4084] John x. 1.

   [4085] John x. 12, 13.

   [4086] Phil. i. 18, ii. 21.

   [4087] Matt. xxiii. 2.

   [4088] John x. 16.

   [4089] Luke v. 2.

   [4090] Vim.

   [4091] Gen. xxix. 23, 28.

   [4092] Matt. xx. 30.

   [4093] Matt. xxvii. 51.

   [4094] 2 Cor. iii. 16.

   [4095] Matt. xxiii. 2, 3.

   [4096] Sententias.

   [4097] Matt. xxiii. 2, 3.

   [4098] Faciunt.

   [4099] Matt. xxiii. 4.

   [4100] Matt. vii. 21.

   [4101] Virtutes.

   [4102] Matt. vii. 22.

   [4103] Matt. vii. 23.

   [4104] Phil. i. 16-18.

   [4105] Proscribatur.

   [4106] John xxi. 16.

   [4107] Phil. i. 18.

   [4108] 1 Cor. iv. 17.

   [4109] Phil. ii. 20, etc.

   [4110] Matt. vi. 2.

   [4111] 2 Tim. ii. 21.

   [4112] John x. 12, 13.

   [4113] Parte.

   [4114] Luke xiv. 11.

   [4115] Matt. vii. 15.

   [4116] Matt. xxiii. 2.

   [4117] Matt. vii. 16, xii. 33.

   [4118] Matt. xxiii. 3.

   [4119] 1 Cor. iv. 3, 4.

   [4120] Vim.

   [4121] Ezek. xxxiii. 7, etc.

   [4122] Molestum.

   [4123] Matt. xxv. 24, etc.; Luke xix. 21, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXXVIII.

   [CXXXVIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John x. 14, "I am the good shepherd," etc.
   Against the Donatists.

   1. We have heard the Lord Jesus setting forth to us the office of a
   good shepherd. And herein He hath doubtless given us to know, as we may
   understand it, that there are good shepherds. And yet that the
   multitude of shepherds might not be understood in a wrong sense; He
   saith, "I am the good Shepherd." [4124] And wherein He is the good
   Shepherd, He showeth in the words following; "The good Shepherd," saith
   He, "layeth down His life for the sheep. But he that is an hireling,
   and not the shepherd, seeth the wolf coming, and fleeth; because he
   careth not for the sheep, for he is an hireling." [4125] Christ then is
   the good Shepherd. What was Peter? was he not a good shepherd? Did not
   he too lay down his life for the sheep? What was Paul? what the rest of
   the Apostles? what the blessed Bishops, Martyrs, who followed close
   upon their times? What again our holy Cyprian? Were they not all good
   shepherds, not hirelings, of whom it is said, "Verily I say unto you,
   they have received their reward"? [4126] All these then were good
   shepherds, not simply for that they shed their blood, but that they
   shed it for the sheep. For not in pride, but in charity they shed it.

   2. For even among the heretics, they who for their iniquities and
   errors have suffered any trouble, vaunt themselves in the name of
   martyrdom, that with this fair covering disguised [4127] they may
   plunder the more easily, for wolves they are. Now if ye would know in
   what rank they are to be held, hear that good shepherd, the Apostle
   Paul, that not all who even give up their bodies in suffering to the
   flames, are to be accounted to have shed their blood for the sheep, but
   rather against the sheep. "If," saith he, "I speak with the tongues of
   men, and angels, but have not charity, I am become as sounding brass,
   or a tinkling cymbal. If I should know all mysteries, and have all
   prophecy, and all faith, so that I could remove mountains, but have not
   charity, I am nothing." [4128] Now a great thing truly is this faith
   that removes mountains. They are indeed all great things; but if I have
   them without charity, saith he, not they, but I am nothing. But up to
   this point he hath not touched them, who glory in sufferings under the
   false name of martyrdom. Hear how he toucheth, yea rather pierceth them
   through and through. "If I should distribute," saith he, "all my goods
   to the poor, and deliver my body to be burned." Now here they are. But
   mark what follows; "but have not charity, it profiteth me nothing." Lo,
   they have come to suffering, come even to the shedding of blood, yea
   come to the burning of the body; and yet it profiteth them nothing,
   because charity is lacking. Add charity, they all profit; take charity
   away, all the rest profit nothing.

   3. What a good is this charity, Brethren! What more precious? what
   yieldeth greater light? or strength? or profit? or security? Many are
   the gifts of God, which even the wicked have, who shall say, "Lord, we
   have prophesied in Thy Name, in Thy Name have cast out devils, in Thy
   Name done many mighty works." [4129] And He will not answer, "Ye have
   not done them." For in the Presence of so great a Judge, they will not
   dare to lie or boast of things they have not done. But for that they
   had not charity, He answereth them all, "I know you not." Now how can
   he have so much as the smallest charity, who when even [4130]
   convicted, loves not unity? It was then as impressing on good shepherds
   this unity, that our Lord was unwilling to mention many shepherds. For
   it is not, as I have said already, that Peter was not a good shepherd,
   and Paul, the rest of the Apostles, and the holy Bishops who were after
   them, and blessed Cyprian. All these were good shepherds; and
   notwithstanding to good shepherds, He commended not good shepherds, but
   a good Shepherd. "I," saith He, "am the good Shepherd."

   4. Let us question the Lord with such little understanding as we have,
   and in most humble discourse hold converse with so great a Master. What
   sayest Thou, O Lord, Thou good Shepherd? For Thou art the good
   Shepherd, who art also the good Lamb; at once Pastor and Pasturage, at
   once Lamb and Lion. What sayest Thou? Let us give ear and aid us, that
   we may understand. "I," saith He, "am the good Shepherd." What is
   Peter? is he either not a shepherd, or a bad one? Let us see, if he be
   not a shepherd. "Lovest thou Me?" [4131] Thou saidst to Him Lord,
   "Lovest thou Me?" And he answered, "I do love Thee." And Thou to him,
   "Feed My sheep." Thou, Thou, Lord, by Thine Own questioning, by the
   strong assurance of Thine Own words, madest of the lover a shepherd. He
   is a shepherd then to whom Thou didst commit Thy sheep to be fed. Thou
   didst Thyself entrust them, he is a shepherd. Let us now see whether he
   be not a good one. This we find by the very question, and his answer.
   Thou didst ask, whether he loved Thee; he answered, "I do love Thee."
   Thou sawest his heart, that he answered truth. Is he not then good, who
   loveth so great a Good? Whence that answer drawn from his inmost heart?
   Wherefore was this Peter, who had Thine eyes in his heart for
   witnesses, sad because Thou askedst him not once only, but a second and
   a third time, that by a threefold confession of love, he might efface
   the threefold sin of denial; wherefore, I say, being sad that he was
   asked repeatedly by Him who knew what He was asking, and had given what
   He heard; wherefore being sad, did he return such an answer, "Lord,
   Thou knowest all things, Thyself knowest that I love Thee"? What! in
   making such a confession, such a profession rather, would he lie? In
   truth then, he made answer of his love to Thee, and from his inmost
   heart he gave utterance to a lover's words. Now Thou hast said, "A good
   man out of the good treasure of the heart bringeth forth good things."
   [4132] So then he is both a shepherd, and a good shepherd; nothing it
   is true to the power and goodness of the Shepherd of shepherds; but
   nevertheless even he is both a shepherd, and a good one; and all other
   such are good shepherds.

   5. What means it then, that to good shepherds Thou dost set forth One
   Only Shepherd, but that in One Shepherd Thou teachest unity? and the
   Lord Himself explains this more clearly by my ministry, putting you,
   beloved, in remembrance by this Gospel, and saying, "Hear ye what I
   have set forth; I have said, I am the good Shepherd;' because all the
   rest, all the good shepherds, are My members." One Head, One Body, One
   Christ. So then both the Shepherd of shepherds, and the shepherds of
   the Shepherd, and the sheep with their shepherds under The Shepherd.
   What is all this, but what the Apostle says? "For as the body is one,
   and hath many members, and all the members of the body, being many, are
   one body; so also is Christ." [4133] Therefore if Christ be even so,
   with good reason doth Christ in Himself containing all good shepherds,
   set forth One, saying, "I am the good Shepherd.' I am,' I Alone am, all
   the rest with Me are one in unity. Whoso feedeth without Me, feedeth
   against Me. He that gathereth not with Me, scattereth.'" [4134] Hear
   then this unity more forcibly set forth; "Other sheep," saith He, "I
   have which are not of this fold." [4135] For He was speaking to the
   first fold of the stock of the fleshly Israel. But there were others of
   the stock of the faith of this Israel, and they were yet without, were
   among the Gentiles, predestinated, not yet gathered in. These He knew
   who had predestinated them; He knew, who had come to redeem them with
   the shedding of His Own Blood. He saw them who did not yet see Him; He
   knew them who yet believed not on Him. "Other sheep," saith He, "I have
   which are not of this fold;" because they are not of the stock of the
   flesh of Israel. But nevertheless they shall not be outside of this
   fold, "for them also I must bring, that there may be One Fold, and One
   Shepherd."

   6. With good reason then to This Shepherd of shepherds, doth His
   Beloved, His Spouse, His Fair One, but by Him made fair, before by sin
   deformed, beautiful afterward through pardon and grace, speak in her
   love and ardour after Him, and say to Him, "Where feedest Thou?" [4136]
   And observe how, by what transport this spiritual love is here
   animated. And far better are they by this transport delighted, who have
   tasted ought of the sweetness of this love. They hear this properly,
   who love Christ. For in them, and of them, doth the Church sing this in
   the Song of Songs; who love Christ, as it seemed without beauty, yet
   the Only Beautiful One. "For we saw Him," it is said, "and He had
   neither beauty nor comeliness." [4137] Such He appeared on the Cross,
   such when crowned with thorns did He exhibit Himself, disfigured, and
   without comeliness, as if He had lost His power, as if not the Son of
   God. Such seemed He to the blind. For it is in the person of the Jews
   that Isaiah said this, "We saw Him, and He had no beauty nor
   comeliness." When it was said, "If He be the Son of God, let Him come
   down from the Cross. He saved others, Himself He cannot save." [4138]
   And smiting Him on the head with a reed, they said, "Prophesy unto us,
   thou Christ, who smote Thee?" [4139] Because "He had neither beauty nor
   comeliness." As such did ye Jews see Him. For "blindness hath happened
   in part to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles enter in," [4140]
   until the other sheep come. Because then blindness hath happened,
   therefore did ye see the Comely One without comeliness. "For had ye
   known Him, ye would never have crucified the Lord of Glory." [4141] But
   ye did it, because ye knew Him not. And yet He who as though without
   beauty bare with you, all Beauteous as He was, prayed for you;
   "Father," saith He, "forgive them, for they know not what they do."
   [4142] For if He were without comeliness, how is it that she loveth
   Him, who saith, "Tell me, O Thou whom my soul loveth"? [4143] How is it
   that she loveth Him? how is it that she burneth for Him? how is it that
   she feareth so much to stray from Him? How is it that she hath so great
   delight in Him, that her only punishment is to be without Him? What
   would there be for which He should be loved, if He were not beautiful?
   But how could she love Him so, if He appeared to her as He did to those
   blind men persecuting Him, and knowing not what they do? As what then
   did she love Him? As "comely in form above the sons of men. Comely in
   form above the sons of men, grace is poured abroad in Thy Lips." [4144]
   So then from these Thy Lips, "Tell me, O Thou whom my soul loveth. Tell
   me," says she, "O Thou whom," not my flesh, but, "my soul loveth. Tell
   me where Thou feedest, where Thou liest down in the midday; lest haply
   I light, as one veiled, upon the flocks of Thy companions." [4145]

   7. It seems obscure, obscure it is; for it is a mystery of the sacred
   marriage bed. For she says, "The King hath brought me into His
   chamber." [4146] Of such a chamber is this a mystery. But ye who are
   not as profane kept off from this chamber, hear ye what ye are, and say
   with her, if with her ye love (and ye do love with her, if ye are in
   her); say all, and yet let one say, for unity saith; "Tell me, O Thou
   whom my soul loveth. For they had one soul to Godward, and one heart.
   [4147] Tell me where Thou feedest, where Thou liest down in the
   midday?" What does the midday [4148] signify? "Great heat, and great
   brightness." So then, "make known to me who are Thy wise ones," fervent
   in spirit, and brilliant in doctrine. "Make known to me Thy Right Hand,
   and men learned in heart, in wisdom." [4149] To them may I cleave in
   Thy Body, to them be united, with them enjoy Thee. Tell me then, "tell
   me, where Thou feedest, where Thou liest down in the midday;" lest I
   fall upon them who say other things of Thee, entertain other sentiments
   of Thee; believe other things of Thee, preach other things of Thee; and
   have their own flocks, and are Thy companions; for that they live of
   Thy table, and handle the sacraments of Thy table. For companions are
   so called, because they eat together, [4150] messmates as it were. Such
   are reproved in the Psalm; "For if Mine enemy had spoken great things
   against Me, I would surely have hidden Myself from him; and if he that
   hated Me had spoken great things against Me, I would surely have hidden
   Myself from him; but thou a man of one mind with Me, My guide, and My
   familiar, who didst take sweet meats together with Me, in the house of
   God we walked with consent." [4151] Why then now against the house of
   the Lord with dissent, but that "they have gone out from us, but they
   were not of us?" [4152] Therefore, "O Thou whom my soul loveth," that I
   may not fall upon such, Thy companions, but companions such as Samson's
   were, who kept not faith with their friend, but wished to corrupt his
   wife. [4153] Therefore, that I may not fall upon such as these, "that I
   may not light upon them," that is, fall upon them, "as one that is
   veiled," as one that is concealed, that is, and obscure, not as
   established upon the mountain. "Tell me" then, "O thou whom my soul
   loveth, where Thou feedest, where Thou liest down in the midday;" who
   are the wise and faithful in whom Thou dost specially rest, lest by
   chance as in blindness I fall upon the flocks, not Thy flocks, but the
   flocks of Thy companions. For thou didst not say to Peter, "Feed thy
   sheep," but, "Feed My sheep." [4154]

   8. Let then the "good Shepherd," and, "the Comely in form above the
   sons of men," make answer to this beloved one; make answer to her whom
   He hath made beautiful from among the children of men. Hear ye what He
   answereth, and understand, beware of that wherewith He alarmeth, love
   that which He adviseth. What then doth He answer? How free from soft
   caresses, yea, to her caresses He returneth severity! He is sharp that
   He may bind her closely, that He may keep her. "If thou know not
   thyself," saith He, "O thou fair one among women:" [4155] for however
   fair others may be by the gifts of thy Spouse, they are heresies, fair
   in outward ornament, not within: [4156] fair are they without, and
   outwardly they shine, they disguise themselves by the name of
   righteousness; "but all the beauty of the King's daughter is within."
   [4157] "If" then "thou know not thyself;" that thou art one, that thou
   art throughout all nations, that thou art chaste, that thou oughtest
   not to corrupt thyself with the disordered converse of evil companions.
   "If thou know not thyself," that in uprightness, "he hath espoused thee
   to Me, to present you a chaste Virgin to Christ;" [4158] and that in
   uprightness thou shouldest present thine own self to Me, lest by evil
   converse, "as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your
   minds too should be corrupted from my purity." [4159] "If," I say,
   "thou know not thyself" to be such, "go thy way; go thy way." For to
   others I shall say, "Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." [4160] To
   thee I shall not say, "Enter in;" but, "Go thy way;" that thou mayest
   be among those, who "went out from us." "Go thy way." That is, "if thou
   know not thyself," then, "go thy way." But if thou know thyself, enter
   in. But, "if thou know not thyself, go thy way by the footsteps of the
   flocks, and feed thy kids in the tents of the shepherds. Go thy way by
   the footsteps," not "of the Flock," but, "of the flocks, and feed," not
   as Peter, "My sheep," but, "thy kids; in the tents," not "of the
   Shepherd," but, "of the shepherds;" not of unity, but of dissension;
   not established there, where there is One flock and One Shepherd. The
   beloved one was confirmed, edified, made stronger, prepared to die for
   her Spouse and to live with her Spouse.

   9. These words which I have quoted out of the Holy Song of Songs, of a
   kind of bridal song of the Bridegroom and the Bride (for it is a
   spiritual wedding, wherein we must live in great purity, for Christ
   hath granted to the Church in spirit that which His Mother had in body,
   to be at once a Mother and a Virgin); these words, I say, the Donatists
   accommodate to their own perverted sense in a very different meaning.
   And how I will not conceal from you, and what ye may answer them, I
   will, by the Lord's help, as well as I shall be able, briefly
   recommend. When then we begin to press them with the light of the
   Church's unity spread over the whole world, and demand of them to show
   us any testimony out of the Scriptures, where God hath foretold that
   the Church should be in Africa, as if all the rest of the nations were
   lost; they are in the habit of taking this testimony in their mouths,
   and saying; "Africa is under the midday sun; the Church then" they say,
   "asking the Lord where He feedeth, where He lieth down; He answereth,
   Under the midday sun;'" as if the voice of her who put the question,
   were, "Tell me, O Thou whom my soul loveth, where Thou feedest, where
   Thou liest down;" and the Voice of Him who answereth, were, "Under the
   midday sun;" that is, in Africa. If then it be the Church which asketh,
   and the Lord maketh answer where he feedeth, in Africa, because the
   Church was in Africa; then she who asketh was not in Africa. "Tell me,"
   she saith, "O Thou whom my soul loveth, where Thou feedest, where Thou
   liest down;" and He maketh answer to some Church out of Africa, "Under
   the midday sun," in Africa I lie down, in Africa I feed, as if it were,
   "I do not feed in thee." I repeat, if she who asketh is the Church,
   which no one disputes, which not even themselves gainsay; and they hear
   something about Africa; then she who asketh is out of Africa; and
   because it is the Church, the Church is out of Africa.

   10. But see, I admit that Africa is under the midday sun; although
   Egypt is rather under the meridian, under the midday sun than Africa.
   Now after what fashion This Shepherd is there in Egypt, they who know,
   will acknowledge; and for them that know not, let them enquire how
   large a flock lie gathereth there, how great a multitude He hath of
   holy men and women who utterly despise the world. That flock hath so
   increased, that it hath expelled superstitions even thence. To pass
   over how it hath in its increase banished thence the whole superstition
   of idols, which had been firmly fixed there; I admit what you say, O
   evil companions; I admit it altogether, I agree that Africa is in the
   South, and that Africa is signified in that which is said, "Where
   feedest Thou, where dost Thou lie down under the midday sun?" But do ye
   too equally observe how that up to this point these are the words of
   the Bride, and not yet of the Bridegroom. Hitherto it is the Bride that
   saith, "Tell me, O Thou whom my soul loveth, where Thou feedest, where
   Thou dost lie down in the midday, lest by chance I light, as one
   veiled." O thou deaf, and blind one, if in the "midday" thou seest
   Africa, why in her that is "veiled" dost thou not see the Bride? "Tell
   me," she said, "O Thou whom my soul loveth." Without doubt she
   addresses her Spouse, when she says, "whom" [in the masculine [4161] ]
   "my soul loveth." Just as if it were said, "Tell me, O thou whom [in
   the feminine [4162] ] "my soul loveth;" we should understand that the
   Bridegroom spake these words to His Bride; so when you hear, "Tell me,
   O thou whom" (in the masculine) "my soul loveth, where Thou feedest,
   where Thou liest down;" add to this, to her words belongs also what
   follows, "In the midday." I am asking, "where Thou feedest in the
   midday, lest by chance I light as one veiled upon the flocks of Thy
   companions." I consent entirely, I admit what you understand of Africa;
   it is signified by "the midday." But then as you understand it, the
   Church of Christ beyond the sea is addressing her Spouse, in fear of
   falling into the African error, "O Thou whom my soul, loveth, tell me,"
   teach me. For I hear that "in the midday," that is in Africa, there are
   two parties, yea rather many schisms. [4163] "Tell me," then, "where
   Thou feedest," what sheep belong to Thee, what fold Thou biddest me
   love there, whereunto ought I to unite myself. "Lest by chance I light
   as one veiled." For they mock me as if I were concealed, they mock me
   as destroyed, as though I existed nowhere else. "Lest," then, "as one
   veiled," as if concealed, "I light upon the flocks," that is, upon the
   congregarious of the heretics, "thy companions; the Donatists, the
   Maximinianists, the Rogatists and all the other pests who gather
   without, and who therefore scatter; "Tell me," I pray Thee, if I must
   seek my Shepherd there, that I fall not into the gulf of re-baptizing.
   I exhort you, I beseech you by the sanctity of such nuptials, love this
   Church, be ye in this holy Church, be ye this Church; love the good
   Shepherd, the Spouse so fair, who deceiveth no one, who desireth no one
   to perish. Pray too for the scattered sheep; that they too may come,
   that they too may acknowledge Him, that they too may love Him; that
   there may be One Flock and One Shepherd. Let us turn to the Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4124] John x. 11.

   [4125] John x. 12, 13.

   [4126] Matt. vi. 2, 4.

   [4127] Dealbati.

   [4128] 1 Cor. xiii. 1, etc.

   [4129] Matt. vii. 22.

   [4130] Referring it would seem to the conference held but a little
   while before this with the Donatist party at Carthage.

   [4131] John xxi. 15.

   [4132] Matt. xii. 35.

   [4133] 1 Cor. xii. 12.

   [4134] Matt. xii. 30.

   [4135] John x. 16.

   [4136] Cant. i. 7.

   [4137] Isa. liii. 2, Sept.

   [4138] Mark xv. 31.

   [4139] Matt. xxvi. 68.

   [4140] Rom. xi. 25.

   [4141] 1 Cor. ii. 8.

   [4142] Luke xxiii. 34.

   [4143] Cant. i. 7.

   [4144] Ps. xlv. 2.

   [4145] Cant. i. 7, Sept.

   [4146] Cant. i. 4.

   [4147] Acts iv. 32.

   [4148] It is not possible in English to preserve the same translation
   for the word meridies, which occurs throughout this passage in the two
   senses of the noon or midday, and the South.

   [4149] Ps. lxxxix. 12, Sept. (xc. English version).

   [4150] Sodales enim dicti sunt, quod simul edant, quasi simul edales.

   [4151] Ps. liv. 13, etc., Sept. (lv. 12-14, English version).

   [4152] 1 John ii. 19.

   [4153] Judg. xiv.

   [4154] John xxi. 17.

   [4155] Cant. viii. Sept.

   [4156] Visceribus.

   [4157] Ps. xlv. 13.

   [4158] 2 Cor. xi. 2.

   [4159] 2 Cor. xi. 3.

   [4160] Matt. xxv. 21.

   [4161] Quem.

   [4162] Quam.

   [4163] Concisiones.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon LXXXIX.

   [CXXXIX. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John x. 30, "I and the Father are one."

   1. Ye have heard what the Lord God, Jesus Christ, the Only Son of God,
   born of God the Father without any mother, and born of a Virgin mother
   without any human father, said, "I and My Father are One." [4164]
   Receive ye this, believe it in such wise that ye may attain [4165] to
   understand it. For faith ought to go before understanding, that
   understanding may be the reward of faith. For the Prophet hath said
   most expressly, "Unless ye believe, ye shall not understand." [4166]
   What then is simply preached is to be believed; what is with exactness
   discussed, is to be understood. At first then [4167] to imbue your
   minds with faith we preach to you Christ, the Only Son of God the
   Father. Why is added, "The Only Son"? Because He whose Only Son He is,
   hath many sons by grace. All the rest then, all saints are sons of God
   by grace, He Alone by Nature. They who are sons of God by grace are not
   What the Father is. And no saint hath ever dared to say, what that Only
   Son saith, "I and My Father are One." Is He not then our Father too? If
   He be not our Father, how say we when we pray, "Our Father, which art
   in heaven"? [4168] But we are sons whom He hath made sons by His Own
   will, not begotten as sons of His Own Nature. And in truth He hath
   begotten us too, but as it is said, as adopted ones, begotten by the
   favour of His adoption, not by Nature. And this too are we called, for
   that "God hath called us into the adoption of sons;" [4169] we are
   though adopted, men. He is called the Only Son, the Only Begotten, in
   that, He is That which the Father is; but we are men, The Father is
   God. In then that He is That which the Father is; He said, and said
   truly, "I and My Father are One." What is, "are One"? Are of one
   Nature. What is, "are One"? Are of one Substance.

   2. Peradventure, ye but imperfectly understand what "of one Substance"
   is. Take we pains that ye may understand it; may God assist both me who
   speak, and you that hear; me, that I may speak such things as are true
   and fit for you; and you, that before and above all things ye may
   believe; and then that ye may understand as best ye can. What then is
   "of One Substance"? Let me make use of similitudes to you, that what is
   imperfectly understood may be made clear by example. As, suppose, God
   is gold. His Son is gold also. If similitudes ought not to be given for
   heavenly things from things earthly, how is it written, "Now the Rock
   was Christ"? [4170] So then, Whatsoever the Father is, This is the Son
   also; as I have said, for example, "The Father is gold, the Son is
   gold." For he who says, "The Son is not of the Very Substance which the
   Father is;" what else says he but, "The Father is gold, the Son is
   silver"? If the Father be gold, and the Son silver; the Only Son hath
   degenerated from the Father. A man begets a man; of what substance the
   father is who begets, of the same substance is the Son who is begotten.
   What is, "of the same substance"? The one is a man, and the other is a
   man; the one hath a soul; so hath the other a soul; the one hath a
   body, so hath the other a body; what one is, that is the other.

   3. But the Arian heresy makes answer, and says. What says it to me?
   "Mark what thou hast said"? What have I said? "That the Son of a man
   may be compared to the Son of God." Certainly he may be compared; but
   not as you suppose, in strictness of expression; [4171] but for a
   similitude. But tell me now what you would make of this. "Do you not
   see," says he, "that the father who begets is greater [4172] in age,
   and the son who is begotten less? How then say ye? tell me; how then
   say ye, that the Father and the Son, God and Christ, are equal; when ye
   see that when a man begets a son, the son is less, and the father
   greater?" Thou wise one, in eternity thou art looking for times; where
   there are no times, thou art looking for differences of age! When the
   father is greater in age, and the son less, both are in time; the one
   groweth, for that the other groweth old. For by nature, the man, the
   father, did not beget one less, by nature, as I said, but by age.
   Wouldest thou know, how that by nature he did not beget one less? Wait,
   let him grow, and he will be equal to his father. For a little boy even
   by growing attains to his father's full size. Whereas you assert that
   the Son of God is in such wise born less, as never to grow, and by
   growing even to attain to His Father's size. Now then a man's son born
   of a man, is born in a better condition than the Son of God. How?
   Because the former grows, and attains to his father's size. But Christ,
   if it is as ye say, is in such wise born less, as that He must ever
   remain less, and no growth of years at least is to be looked for here.
   Thus then you say that there is a diversity in nature. But why say you
   so, but because you will not believe the Son to be of the Same
   Substance which the Father is? Finally, first acknowledge that He is of
   the Same Substance, and so call Him less. Consider the case of a man,
   he is a man. What is his substance? He is a man. What is he whom he
   begets? He is less, but he is a man. The age is unequal, the nature
   equal. Do you then say too, "What the Father is, That is the Son, but
   the Son is less"? Say so, make a step forward, say, "of the Same
   Substance, only less;" and you will get to His being equal. For it is
   not a little step you take, it is not a little approach you make to the
   truth, of acknowledging Him equal, if you shall acknowledge Him to be
   of the Same Substance, though less. "But He is not of the Same
   Substance," this you say. So then in that you say this, here is gold
   and silver; what you say is as if a man were to beget a horse. For a
   man is of one substance, a horse of another. If then the Son is of
   another substance than the Father, the Father hath begotten a monster.
   For when a creature, that is a woman, gives birth to anything that is
   not a man, it is called a monster. But that it be not a monster, he
   that is born is that which he is that begat him, that is, a man and a
   man, a horse and a horse, a dove and a dove, a sparrow and a sparrow.

   4. To His creatures hath He given to beget that which they are. To His
   creatures, to mortal, earthly creatures, hath God given, hath granted
   to beget that which they are; and thinkest thou that He hath not been
   able to reserve this for Himself, He who is before all ages? Should He
   who hath no beginning of time, beget a son, different from That which
   Himself is, beget a degenerate son? Hear ye how great a blasphemy it is
   to say, that the Only Son of God is of another substance. Most
   certainly if He is so, He is degenerate. If you should say to any child
   of man, "Thou art degenerate," how great an offence is it! And yet in
   what sense is any child of man said to be degenerate? As, for example,
   his father is brave, he is a poltroon and a coward. If any one sees
   him, and would rebuke him, as he thinks of his brave father, what does
   he say to him? "Get thee hence, thou degenerate one!" What is
   "degenerate one"? "Thy father was a brave man, and thou tremblest
   through fear." He to whom this is said, is degenerate by some fault, by
   nature he is equal. What is, "by nature he is equal"? He is a man,
   which his father also is. But the one brave, the other a coward; the
   one bold, the other timid; yet both men. By some fault then he is
   degenerate, not by nature. But when you say, that the Only Son, the One
   Son of the Father, is degenerate, you say nought else, but that He is
   not What the Father is; and you do not say, that having been already
   born, He has become degenerate; but He was begotten so. Who can endure
   this blasphemy? If they could in any sort whatever see this blasphemy,
   they would fly from it, and become catholics.

   5. But what shall I say, Brethren? Let us not be angry with them; but
   pray we for them, that God would give them understanding; for
   peradventure they were born so. [4173] What is, were born so? They
   receive what they hold from their parents. They prefer their birth to
   the truth. Let them become what they are not, that they may be able to
   keep what they are; that is, let them become catholics, that they may
   keep their nature as men; that the creation of God in them perish not,
   let the grace of God be added to them. For they imagine that by their
   outrage of the Son they honour the Father. When you say to him, "Thou
   blasphemest;" he answers, "Why do I blaspheme?" "In that thou sayest
   that the Son is not what the Father is." And he answers me, "Yea, it is
   thou who blasphemest." Why? "Because thou wouldest make the Son equal
   to the Father." "I do wish to make the Son equal with the Father, but
   is this to make a stranger equal? The Father rejoiceth when I equal
   with Him His Only Son; He rejoiceth because He is not envious. And
   because God is not envious of His Only Son, therefore did He beget Him
   Such as He is Himself. Thou doest wrong both to the Son, and to the
   Father Himself, for whose honour thou wouldest do outrage to the Son.
   For in truth for this reason dost thou say that the Son is not of the
   Same Substance, lest thou shouldest do wrong to His Father. I will soon
   show thee, that thou doest wrong to both." "How?" saith he. "If I say
   to any man's son, Thou art degenerate, thou art not like thy father;
   degenerate, thou art not what thy father is. The son hears it, and is
   angry, and says, Was I then born degenerate?' The father hears it, and
   is more angry still. And in his anger what says he? Have I then
   begotten a degenerate son? If I then be one thing, and I have begotten
   another, I have begotten a monster.' What is it then, that whereas thou
   wishest to pay honour to the One by doing outrage to the Other, thou
   doest outrage to Both? Thou offendest the Son, but thou wilt not
   propitiate the Father. When thou honourest the Father by outraging the
   Son, thou offendest both the Son and the Father. From whom wilt thou
   fly? to whom wilt thou fly? When the Father is angry with thee, dost
   thou fly to the Son? What doth He say to thee? To whom dost thou fly,
   to Me, whom thou hast made degenerate?' When the Son is offended, dost
   thou run to the Father? He too saith to thee; To whom dost thou fly, to
   Me who, thou hast said, have begotten a degenerate Son?'" Let this
   suffice for you; hold it fast, commit it to memory, inscribe it in your
   faith. But that ye may understand it, pour out your prayers to God, the
   Father and the Son, who are One.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4164] John x. 30.

   [4165] Mereamini.

   [4166] Isa. vii. 9, Sept.

   [4167] He seems to be addressing the Catechumens (Bened. note).

   [4168] Matt. vi. 9.

   [4169] Eph. i. 5.

   [4170] 1 Cor. x. 4.

   [4171] Ad proprietatem.

   [4172] Major.

   [4173] Arians.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XC.

   [CXL. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John xii. 44, "He that believeth on me,
   believeth not on me, but on him that sent me." Against a certain
   expression of Maximinus, a bishop of the Arians, who spread his
   blasphemy in Africa where he was with the Count Segisvult.

   1. What is it, Brethren, which we have heard the Lord saying, "He that
   believeth on Me, believeth not on Me, but on Him that sent Me"? [4174]
   It is good for us to believe on Christ, especially seeing that He hath
   also Himself expressly said this which ye have now heard, that is, that
   "He had come a Light into the world, and whosoever believeth on Him
   shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life." [4175]
   Good then it is to believe on Christ; and a great evil it is not to
   believe on Christ. But because Christ the Son is, Whatsoever He is, of
   the Father, but the Father is not of the Son, but is the Father of the
   Son; He recommends to us indeed faith in Himself, but refers the honour
   to His Original. [4176]

   2. For hold this fast as a firm and settled truth, if ye would continue
   Catholics, that God the Father begat God the Son without time, and made
   Him of a Virgin in time. The first nativity exceedeth times; the second
   nativity enlighteneth times. Yet both nativities are marvellous; the
   one without a mother, the other without a father. When God begat the
   Son, He begat Him of Himself, not of a mother; when the Mother gave
   birth to her Son, she gave Him birth as a Virgin, not by man. He was
   born of the Father without a beginning; He was born of a mother, as
   to-day [4177] at an appointed beginning. Born of the Father He made us;
   born of a mother He re-made us. He was born of the Father, that we
   might be; He was born of a mother, that we might not be lost. But the
   Father begat Him equal to Himself, and All Whatsoever the Son is, He
   hath of the Father. But What God the Father is, He hath not of the Son.
   Accordingly we say that the Father is God, of none; the Son, God of
   God. Wherefore all that the Son doeth marvellously, all that He saith
   truly, He attributeth to Him of whom He is; yet can He not be ought
   else than He of whom He is. Adam was made a man; he had power to become
   something other than he was made. For he was made righteous, and he had
   power to become unrighteous. But the Only-Begotten Son of God, What He
   is, This cannot be changed; He cannot be changed into anything else,
   cannot be diminished, What He was He cannot but be, He cannot but be
   equal to the Father. But undoubtedly He who gave all things to the Son
   by His Birth, gave it to One not needing ought; without doubt this very
   equality too with the Father, the Father gave to the Son. How did the
   Father give It? did He beget Him less, and add to Him to complete His
   Form, that He might make Him equal? If he had done this, He would have
   given it to one in need. But I have told you already what ye ought most
   firmly to hold fast, that is, that All That the Son is, the Father gave
   Him, gave Him, that is, by His Birth, not as in need of ought. If He
   gave it to Him by His Birth, and not as in need, then doubtless He both
   gave Him equality, and in giving Him equality, begat Him equal. And
   although the One be One Person, and the Other Another; yet is not the
   One one thing, and the Other another; but What the One is, That the
   Other also. He who is the One, is not the Other; but What the One, That
   too the Other.

   3. "He Who sent Me," saith He, ye have heard it; "He Who sent Me,"
   saith He, "He gave Me a commandment what I should say, and what I
   should speak; and I know that His commandment is life everlasting."
   [4178] It is John's Gospel, hold it fast. "He Who sent Me, He gave Me a
   commandment what I should say, and what I should speak; and I know that
   His commandment is life everlasting." O that He would grant me to say
   what I wish! For my poverty and His abundance straiteneth me. "He,"
   saith He, "gave Me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should
   speak; and I know that His commandment is life everlasting." Search in
   the Epistle of this John the Evangelist for what he hath said of
   Christ. "Let us believe," he says, "His True Son Jesus Christ. This is
   the True God and Everlasting Life." [4179] What is, "The True God, and
   Everlasting Life"? The True Son of God is the "the True God, and
   Everlasting Life." Why did He say, "On His True Son"? Because God hath
   many sons, therefore was He to be distinguished, by adding that He was
   the True Son. Not by simply saying that He is the Son; but by adding,
   as I have said, that He is the True Son; therefore He was to be
   distinguished, because of the many sons which God hath. For we are sons
   by grace, He by Nature. We made by the Father through Him; He Himself
   That Which the Father is; are we too That Which God is?

   4. But some man coming across us, knowing not what he is saying, says,
   "For this reason was it said, "I and My Father are One; [4180] for that
   They have with One Another an agreement of will, not because the Nature
   of the Son is the Very Same as the Nature of the Father. For the
   Apostles too (now this is what he said, [4181] not I), for the Apostles
   too are one with the Father and the Son." Horrible blasphemy! "And the
   Apostles," says he, "are one with the Father and the Son, in that they
   obey the will of the Father and the Son." Has he dared to say this? Let
   Paul then say, "I and God are one." Let Peter say it, let every one of
   the Prophets say, "I and God are one." They do not say it; God forbid
   they should. They know that they are a different nature, a nature that
   needeth to be saved; they know that they are a different nature, a
   nature that needeth to be enlightened. No one says, "I and God are
   one." Whatsoever progress he may make, howsoever he may surpass others
   in holiness, with how great eminence soever of virtue he may excel, he
   never saith, "I and God are one;" for if he have excellence, and
   therefore saith it; by saying it, he loseth what he had.

   5. Believe then that the Son is equal with the Father; but yet that the
   Son is of the Father; but the Father not of the Son. The Original is
   with the Father, equality with the Son. For if He be not equal, He is
   not a true Son. For what are we saying, Brethren? If He is not equal,
   He is less; if He is less, I ask the nature that needeth to be saved,
   in its misbelief, "how is He born less?" Answer, Doth He as being less
   grow or not? If He groweth, then the Father groweth old. But if He will
   ever be what He was born; if He was born less, He will continue less;
   with this His loss He will be perfect; born perfect with this loss of
   the Father's Form, He is never to attain to the Father's Form. Thus do
   ye ungodly assail [4182] the Son; thus do ye heretics blaspheme the
   Son. What then saith the Catholic faith? The Son is God, of God the
   Father; God the Father, not God of the Son. But God the Son equal with
   the Father, Born equal; not Born less, not made equal, but Born equal.
   What the Father is, That is He also who was born. Was the Father ever
   without the Son? God forbid! Take away your "ever," where there is no
   time. The Father always, the Son always. The Father without beginning
   of time, the Son without beginning of time; the Father never before the
   Son, the Father never without the Son. But yet because the Son is God
   of God the Father, and the Father God, but not of God the Son; let not
   the honouring of the Son in the Father displease us. For the honouring
   of the Son giveth honour to the Father, it diminisheth not His Own
   Divinity.

   6. Because then I was speaking of what I had brought forward, "And I
   knew," saith He, "that His commandment is everlasting life." [4183]
   Mark, Brethren, what I am saying; "I know that His commandment is
   everlasting life." And we read in the same John concerning Christ, "He
   is The True God and Everlasting Life." [4184] If the Father's
   commandment is "everlasting Life," and Christ the Son Himself is
   "everlasting Life;" the Son is Himself the Father's Commandment. For
   how is not That the Father's Commandment, which is the Father's Word?
   Or if you take the commandment given to the Son by the Father in a
   carnal sense, as if the Father said to the Son, "I command Thee this, I
   wish Thee to do that;" in what words spake He to the Only Word? When He
   gave commandment to the Word, did He look for words? That the Father's
   Commandment then is "Life everlasting," and that the Son Himself is
   "Life everlasting," believe ye and receive, believe and understand, for
   the Prophet saith, "Unless ye believe ye shall not understand." [4185]
   Do ye not comprehend? Be enlarged. Hear the Apostle: "Be ye enlarged,
   bear not the yoke with unbelievers." [4186] They who will not believe
   this before they comprehend, are unbelievers. And because they have
   determined to be unbelievers, they will remain in their ignorance. Let
   them believe then that they may understand. Most certainly the Father's
   Commandment is "everlasting Life." Therefore the Father's Commandment
   is the Very Son who was born this day; a Commandment not given in time
   but a Commandment Born. The Gospel of John exercises our minds, refines
   [4187] and uncarnalizes them, that of God we may think not after a
   carnal but a spiritual manner. Let so much then, Brethren, suffice you;
   lest in length of disputation, the sleep of forgetfulness steal over
   you.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4174] John xii. 44.

   [4175] John xii. 46; John viii. 12.

   [4176] Authorem.

   [4177] The Bened. conjecture that the word "hodie" here and at the end
   was added in order to adapt this Sermon to be preached on Christmas
   Day.

   [4178] John xii. 49, 50.

   [4179] 1 John v. 20.

   [4180] John x. 30.

   [4181] Maximinus in his Conference with St. Augustin, and St. Augustin
   in his Answer, B. ii. cont. Maxim. ch. 22.

   [4182] Addicitis.

   [4183] John xii. 50.

   [4184] 1 John v. 20.

   [4185] Isa. vii. 9, Sept.

   [4186] 2 Cor. vi. 13, 14.

   [4187] Limat.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XCI.

   [CXLI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John xiv. 6, "I am the way, and the truth,
   and the life."

   1. Amongst other things, when the Holy Gospel was being read, ye heard
   what the Lord Jesus said, "I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life."
   [4188] Truth and life doth every man desire; but not every man doth
   find the way. That God is a certain Life Eternal, Unchangeable,
   Intelligible, Intelligent, Wise, Making wise, some philosophers even of
   this world have seen. The fixed, settled, unwavering truth, wherein are
   all the principles [4189] of all things created, they saw indeed, but
   afar off; they saw, but amid the error in which they were placed; and
   therefore what way to attain to that so great, and ineffable, and
   beatific a possession they formed not. For that even they saw (as far
   as can be seen by man) the Creator by means of the creature, the Worker
   by His work, the Framer of the world by the world, the Apostle Paul is
   witness, whom Christians ought surely to believe. For he said when he
   was speaking of such; "The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against
   all ungodliness." [4190] These are, as ye recognise, the words of the
   Apostle Paul; "The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
   ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men; who detain the truth in
   unrighteousness." Did he say that they do not detain truth? No: but,
   "They detained the truth in unrighteousness." What they detain, is
   good; but wherein they detain it, is bad. "They detain the truth in
   unrighteousness."

   2. Now it occurred to him that it might be said to him, "Whence do
   these ungodly men detain the truth? Hath God spoken to any one of them?
   Have they received the Law as the people of the Israelites by Moses?
   Whence then do they detain the truth, though it be even in this
   unrighteousness?" Hear what follows, and he shows. "Because that which
   can be known of God," he says, "is manifest in them; for God hath
   manifested it unto them." [4191] Manifested it unto them to whom He
   hath not given the Law? Hear how He hath manifested it. "For the
   invisible things of Him are clearly seen, being understood by the
   things that are made." [4192] Ask the world, the beauty of the heaven,
   the brilliancy and ordering of the stars, the sun, that sufficeth for
   the day, the moon, the solace of the night; ask the earth fruitful in
   herbs, and trees, full of animals, adorned with men; ask the sea, with
   how great and what kind of fishes filled; ask the air, with how great
   birds stocked; [4193] ask all things, and see if they do not as if it
   were by a language [4194] of their own make answer to thee, "God made
   us." These things have illustrious philosophers sought out, and by the
   art have come to know the Artificer. What then? Why is the wrath of God
   revealed against this ungodliness? "Because they detain the truth in
   unrighteousness?" Let him come, let him show how. For how they came to
   know Him, he hath said already. "The invisible things of Him," that is
   God, "are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made;
   His eternal Power also and Godhead; so that they are without excuse.
   Because that when they knew God, they glorified Him not as God, neither
   were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish
   heart was darkened." [4195] They are the Apostle's words, not mine:
   "And their foolish heart was darkened; for professing themselves to be
   wise, they became fools." [4196] What by curious search they found, by
   pride they lost. "Professing themselves to be wise," attributing, that
   is, the gift of God to themselves, "they became fools." They are the
   Apostle's words, I say; "Professing themselves to be wise, they became
   fools."

   3. Show, prove their foolishness. Show, O Apostle, and as thou hast
   shown us whereby they were able to attain to the knowledge of God, for
   that "the invisible things of Him are clearly seen, being understood by
   those things that are made;" so now show how, "professing themselves to
   be wise, they became fools." Hear; Because "they changed," he says,
   "the glory of the incorruptible God into the likeness of the image of a
   corruptible man, and of birds, and of four-footed beasts, and of
   creeping things." [4197] For of figures of these animals, the Pagans
   made themselves gods. Thou hast found out God, and thou worshippest an
   idol. Thou hast found out the truth, and this very truth dost thou
   detain in unrighteousness. And what by the works of God thou hast come
   to know, by the works of man thou losest. Thou hast considered the
   universe, [4198] hast collected the order of the heaven, the earth, the
   sea, and all the elements; thou wilt not take heed to this, that the
   world is the work of God, an idol is the work of a carpenter. If the
   carpenter as he has given the figure, could also give a heart, the
   carpenter would be worshipped by his own idol. For, O man, as God is
   thy Framer, so the idol's framer is a man. Who is thy God? He That made
   thee. Who is the carpenter's god? He That made him. Who is the idol's
   god? He that made it. If then the idol had a heart, would he not
   worship the carpenter who made it? See in what unrighteousness they
   detained the truth, and found not the way that leadeth to that
   possession which they saw.

   4. But Christ, for that He is with the Father, the Truth, and Life, the
   Word of God, of whom it is said, "The Life was the Light of men;"
   [4199] for that I say He is with the Father, the Truth, and Life, and
   we had no way whereby to go to the Truth, the Son of God, who is ever
   in the Father the Truth and Life, by assuming man's nature became the
   Way. Walk by Him as Man, and thou comest to God. By Him thou goest, to
   Him thou goest. Look not out for any way whereby to come to Him,
   besides Himself. For if He had not vouchsafed to be the Way, we should
   have always gone astray. He then became the Way Whereby thou shouldest
   come; I do not say to thee, seek the Way. The Way Itself hath come to
   thee, arise and walk. Walk, with the life, [4200] not with the feet.
   For many walk well with the feet, and with their lives walk ill. For
   sometimes even those who walk well, run outside the way. Thus you will
   find men living well, and not Christians. They run well; but they run
   not in the way. The more they run, the more they go astray; because
   they are out of the Way. But if such men as these come to the Way, and
   hold on the Way, O how great is their security, because they both walk
   well, and do not go astray! But if they do not hold on the Way, however
   well they walk, alas! how are they to be bewailed! For better is it to
   halt in the way, than to walk on stoutly outside the way. Let this
   suffice for you, Beloved. Turn we to the Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4188] John xiv. 6.

   [4189] Rationes.

   [4190] Rom. i. 18.

   [4191] Rom. i. 19.

   [4192] Rom. i. 20.

   [4193] Viget.

   [4194] Sensu.

   [4195] Rom. i. 21.

   [4196] Rom. i. 22.

   [4197] Rom. i. 23.

   [4198] Totum.

   [4199] John i. 4.

   [4200] Moribus.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XCII.

   [CXLII. Ben.]

   On the same words of the Gospel, John xiv. 6, "I am the way," etc.

   1. The divine lessons raise us up, that we be not broken by despair;
   and terrify us again, that we be not tossed to and fro by pride. But to
   hold the middle, the true, the strait way, as it were between the left
   hand of despair, and the right hand of presumption, would be most
   difficult for us, had not Christ said, "I am the Way, and the Truth,
   and the Life." [4201] As if He had said, "By what way wouldest thou go?
   I am the Way'. Whither wouldest thou go? I am the Truth.' Where
   wouldest thou abide? I am the Life.'" Let us then walk with all
   assurance in the Way; but let us fear snares by the way side. The enemy
   does not dare to lay his snares in the way; because Christ is the Way;
   but most certainly by the way side he ceases not to do so. Whence too
   it is said in the Psalm, "They have laid stumblingblocks for me by the
   way side." [4202] And another Scripture saith, "Remember that thou
   walkest in the midst of snares." [4203] These snares among which we
   walk are not in the way; but yet they are "by the way side." What
   fearest thou, what art thou alarmed at, so thou walk in the Way? Fear
   then, if thou forsake the Way. For for this reason is the enemy even
   permitted to lay snares by the way side, lest through the security of
   exultation the Way be forsaken, and ye fall into the snares.

   2. Christ Humbled is the Way; Christ the Truth and the Life, Christ
   Highly Exalted and God. If thou walk in the Humbled, thou shalt attain
   to the Exalted. If infirm as thou art, thou despise not the Humbled,
   thou shalt abide exceeding strong in the Exalted. For what cause was
   there of Christ's Humiliation, save thine infirmity? For solely and
   irremediably did thine infirmity press thee in, and this circumstance
   it was that made so great a Physician come to thee. For if thy sickness
   had been even such, that thou couldest have gone to the Physician, this
   infirmity might have seemed endurable. But because thou couldest not go
   to Him, He came to thee. He came teaching humility, whereby we might
   return; for that pride allowed us not to return to life; yea had even
   made us depart from life. For the heart of man being lifted up against
   God, and neglecting in its sound state His saving precepts, the soul
   fell away into infirmity; let her in her infirmity learn to hear Him
   whom in her strength she despised. Let her hear Him that she may rise,
   whom she despised, that she might fall. Let her at length, taught by
   experience, give ear to what she had no mind, when taught by precept,
   to obtain. For her misery hath taught her, how evil a thing it is to go
   a whoring from the Lord. For to fall away from that Simple and Singular
   Good, into this multitude of pleasures, into the love of the world, and
   earthly corruption, is to go a whoring from the Lord. And He hath
   addressed her as in a sense a harlot, to warn her to return: very often
   by the Prophets doth He reproach her as a harlot, but yet not despaired
   of, for that He who reproacheth the harlot hath in His Hands the
   cleansing of the harlot too.

   3. For He doth not so reproach as to insult her; but He would bring her
   to confusion of face to heal her. Vehement are the exclamations of
   Scripture, nor doth it deal softly by flattery with those whom it would
   by healing recover. "Ye adulterers, know ye not that the friend of this
   world is constituted the enemy of God?" [4204] The love of the world
   maketh the soul adulterous, the love of the Framer of the world maketh
   the soul chaste; but unless she blush for her corruption, she hath no
   desire to return to that chaste embrace. Be she confounded that she may
   return, who was vaunting herself that she should not return. It was
   pride then that hindered the soul's return. But whoso reproacheth doth
   not cause the sin, but showeth the sin. What the soul was loth to see,
   is placed before her eyes; and what she desired to have behind her
   back, is brought before her face. See thyself in thyself. "Why seest
   thou the mote in thy brother's eye, but perceivest not the beam in
   thine own eye?" [4205] The soul which went away from herself, is
   recalled to herself. As she had gone away from herself, so went she
   away from her Lord. For she had respect to herself, and pleased
   herself, and became enamoured of her own power. She withdrew from him,
   and abode not in herself; and from her own self she is repelled, and
   from herself shut out, and she falleth away unto things without her.
   She loves the world, loves the things of time, loves earthly things;
   who if she but loved herself to the neglect of Him by whom she was
   made, would at once be less, at once fail by loving that which is less.
   For she is less than God; yea less by far, and by so much less as the
   thing made is less than the Maker. It was God then That ought to have
   been loved, yea in such wise ought God to be loved, that if it might be
   so, we should forget ourselves. What then is this change? The soul hath
   forgotten herself, but by loving the world; let her now forget herself,
   but by loving the world's Maker. Driven away even from herself, I say,
   she hath in a manner lost herself, and hath not skilled to see her own
   actions, she justifies her iniquities; she is puffed up, and prides
   herself in insolence, in voluptuousness, in honours, in posts of
   authority, in riches, in the power of vanity. She is reproved, rebuked,
   is shown to herself, mislikes herself, confesses her deformity, longs
   for her first beauty, and she who went away in profusion returns in
   confusion. [4206]

   4. Seemeth he to pray against her, or for her, who says, "Fill their
   faces with shame"? It seems to be an adversary, it seems an enemy. Hear
   what follows, and see whether a friend can offer this prayer. "Fill,"
   says he, "their faces with shame, and they shall seek Thy Name, O
   Lord." [4207] Did he hate them whose faces he desired to be filled with
   shame? See how he loves them whom he would have seek the Name of the
   Lord. Does he love only, or hate only? or does he both hate, and love?
   Yea, he both hates, and loves. He hates what is thine, he loves thee.
   What is, "He hates what is thine, he loves thee"? He hates what thou
   hast made, he loves what God hath made. For what are thine own things
   but sins? And what art thou but what God made thee, a man after His Own
   image and likeness? Thou dost neglect what thou wast made, love what
   thou hast made. Thou dost love thine own works without thee, dost
   neglect the work of God within thee. Deservedly dost thou go away,
   deservedly fall off, yea, deservedly even from thine own self depart;
   deservedly hear the words, "A spirit that goeth and returneth not."
   [4208] Hear rather Him That calleth and saith, "Turn ye unto Me, and I
   will turn unto you." [4209] For God doth not really turn away, and turn
   again; Abiding the Same He rebuketh, Unchangeable He rebuketh. He hath
   turned away, in that thou hast turned thyself away. Thou hast fallen
   from Him, He hath not fallen away from thee. [4210] Hear Him then
   saying to thee, "Turn ye unto Me, and I will turn unto you." For this
   is, "I turn unto you, in that ye turn unto Me." He followeth on the
   back of him that flieth, He enlighteneth the face of him that
   returneth. For whither wilt thou fly in flying from God? Whither wilt
   thou fly in flying from Him who is contained in no place, and is
   nowhere absent? He That delivereth him that turneth to him, punisheth
   him that turneth away. Thou hast a Judge by flying; have a Father by
   returning.

   5. But he had been swollen up by pride, and by this swelling could not
   return by the strait way. He who became the Way, crieth out, "Enter ye
   in by the strait gate." [4211] He tries to enter in, the swelling
   impedes him; and his trying is so much the more hurtful, in proportion
   as the swelling is a greater impediment. For the straitness irritates
   [4212] his swelling; and being irritated he will swell the more; and
   swelling more, when will he enter in? So then let him bring down the
   swelling. And how? Let him take the medicine of humility; let him
   against the swelling drink the bitter but wholesome cup; drink the cup
   of humility. Why doth he squeeze himself? The bulk, not for its size,
   but for its swelling, doth not allow him. For size hath solidity,
   swelling inflation. Let not him that is swollen fancy himself of great
   size; that he may be great, and substantial, [4213] and solid, let him
   bring down his swelling. Let him not long after these present things,
   let him not glory in this pomp of things failing and corruptible; let
   him hearken to Him who said, "Enter in by the strait gate," saying
   also, "I am the Way." [4214] For as if some swollen one had asked, "How
   shall I enter in?" He saith, "I am the Way.' Enter in by Me; Thou
   walkest only by Me, to enter in by the door." For as He said, "I am the
   Way;" so also, "I am the Door." [4215] Why seekest thou whereby to
   return, whither to return, whereby to enter in? Lest thou shouldest in
   any respect go astray, He became all for thee. Therefore in brief He
   saith, "Be humble, be meek." Let us hear Him saying this most plainly,
   that thou mayest see whereby is the way, what is the way, whither is
   the way. Whither wouldest thou come? But peradventure in covetousness
   thou wouldest possess all things. "All things are delivered unto Me of
   My Father," [4216] saith He. It may be thou wilt say, "They were
   delivered to Christ: but are they to me?" Hear the Apostle speak; hear,
   as I said some time ago, lest thou be broken by despair; hear how thou
   wert loved when thou hadst nothing to be loved for, hear how thou wert
   loved when unsightly, deformed, before there was ought in thee which
   was meet to be loved. Thou wast first loved, that thou mightest be made
   meet to be loved. For Christ, as the Apostle says, "died for the
   ungodly." [4217] What! will you say that the ungodly deserved to be
   loved? I ask, what did the ungodly deserve? To be damned. Here you will
   answer, Yet, "Christ died for the ungodly." Lo, what was done for thee
   when ungodly; what is reserved for thee now godly? "Christ died for the
   ungodly." Thou didst desire to possess all things; desire it not
   through covetousness, seek it through piety, seek it through humility.
   For if thou seek thus, thou shalt possess. For thou shalt have Him by
   whom all things were made, and with Him shalt possess all things.

   6. I do not say this as though the result of reasoning. Hear the
   Apostle himself saying, "He that spared not His Own Son, but delivered
   Him up for us all; how hath He also not with Him given us all things?"
   [4218] Lo, covetous one, thou hast all things. All things that thou
   lovest, despise, that thou be not kept back from Christ, and hold to
   Him in whom thou mayest possess all things. The Physician Himself then
   needing no such medicine, yet that He might encourage the sick, drank
   what He had no need of; addressing him as it were refusing it, and
   raising him up in his fear, He drank first. "The Cup," saith He, "which
   I shall drink of;" [4219] "I who have nothing in Me to be cured by that
   Cup, am yet to drink it, that thou who needest to drink it, may not
   disdain to drink." Now consider, Brethren, ought the human race to be
   any longer sick after having received such a medicine? God hath been
   now Humbled, and is man still proud? Let him hear, let him learn. "All
   things," saith He, have been delivered unto Me of My Father." [4220] If
   thou desirest all things, thou shalt have them with Me; if thou
   desirest the Father, by Me and in Me thou shalt have Him. "No man
   knoweth the Father but the Son." Do not despair; come to the Son. Hear
   what follows, "And he to whom the Son will reveal Him." Thou saidst, "I
   am not able. Thou callest me through a strait way; I am not able to
   enter in by a strait way." "Come," saith He, "unto Me, all ye that
   labour and are heavy laden." Your burden is your swelling. "Come unto
   Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
   Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me." [4221]

   7. The Master of the Angels crieth out, the Word of God, by whom all
   reasonable souls are without failing fed, the Food That refresheth, and
   abideth Entire, crieth out and saith, "Learn of Me." Let the people
   hear Him, saying, "Learn of Me." Let them make answer, "What do we
   learn of Thee?" For we must be going to hear I know not what from the
   Great Artificer, when He saith, "Learn of Me." Who is it that saith,
   "Learn of Me"? He who formed the earth, who divided the sea and the dry
   land, who created the fowls, who created the animals of the earth, who
   created all things that swim, who set the stars in the heaven, who
   distinguished the day and the night, who established the firmament, who
   separated the light from the darkness, He it is who saith, "Learn of
   Me." Is He haply about to tell us this, that we should do these things
   with Him? Who can do this? God Only doeth them. "Fear not," He saith,
   "I am not laying any burden on thee. Learn of Me,' this which for thy
   sake I was made. Learn of Me,'" saith He, "not to form the creature
   which by Me was made. Neither do I tell you indeed, to learn those
   things which I have granted to some, to whom I would, not to all, to
   raise the dead, to give sight to the blind, to open the ears of the
   deaf; nor to wish as for some great thing to learn these things of Me."
   The disciples returned with joy and exultation, saying, "Lo, even the
   devils are subject unto us through Thy Name." [4222] And the Lord said
   to them, "In this rejoice not, that the devils are subject unto you;
   rejoice rather, because your names are written in heaven." [4223] To
   whom He would, He gave the power to cast out devils, to whom He would,
   He gave the power to raise the dead. Such miracles were done even
   before the Incarnation of the Lord; the dead were raised, lepers were
   cleansed; [4224] we read of these things. And who did them then, but He
   who in after time was the Man-Christ after David, but God-Christ before
   Abraham? He gave the power for all these things, He did them Himself by
   men; yet gave He not that power to all. Ought they to whom He gave it
   not to despair, and say that they have no part in Him because they have
   not been thought [4225] worthy to receive these gifts? In the body are
   divers members: this member can do one thing, that another. God hath
   compacted the body together, He hath not given to the ear to see, nor
   to the eye to hear, nor to the forehead to smell, nor to the hand to
   taste; He hath not given them these functions; but to all the members
   hath He given soundness, hath given union, hath given unity, hath by
   His Spirit quickened and united all alike. And so here He hath not
   given to some to raise the dead, to others He hath not given the power
   of disputation; yet to all what hath He given? "Learn of Me, that I am
   meek and lowly in heart." Forasmuch as we have heard Him say, "I am
   meek and lowly in heart;" here, my Brethren, is our whole remedy,
   "Learn of Me, that I am meek and lowly in heart." What doth it profit a
   man if he do miracles, and is proud, is not meek and lowly in heart?
   Will he not be reckoned in the number of those who shall come at the
   last day, and say, "Have we not prophesied in Thy Name, and in Thy Name
   have done many mighty works?" [4226] But what shall they hear? "I know
   you not, Depart from Me, all ye that work iniquity." [4227]

   8. What then doth it profit us to learn? "That I am meek," saith He,
   "and lowly in heart." He engrafteth charity, and that most genuine
   charity, without confusion, without inflation, without elation, without
   deceit; this doth He engraft, who saith, "Learn of Me, that I am meek
   and lowly in heart." How can one proud and puffed up have any genuine
   [4228] charity? He must needs be envious. And mayhap one who is
   envious, loves, and we are mistaken? God forbid that any one should be
   so mistaken, as to say that an envious man hath charity. And so what
   saith the Apostle? "Charity envieth not." Why doth it not envy? "It is
   not puffed up;" [4229] he immediately annexed the cause for which he
   took away envying from charity. Because it is not puffed up, it envieth
   not. It is true, he said first, "Charity envieth not;" but as though
   thou didst ask, "Why doth it not envy?" he added, "It is not puffed up.
   If then it envieth because it is puffed up; if it be not puffed up, it
   envieth not. If charity is not puffed up, and therefore envieth not;
   then doth He engraft charity who saith, "Learn of Me, that I am meek
   and lowly in heart." [4230]

   9. Let any man have then what he will, let him boast himself of what he
   will. "If I speak with the tongues of men and of Angels, but, have not
   charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal." What is
   more sublime than the gift of divers tongues? It is "brass," it is "a
   tinkling cymbal," if thou take charity away. Hear other gifts; "If I
   should know all mysteries." [4231] What more excellent? what more
   magnificent? Hear yet another; "if I should have all prophecy, and all
   faith, so that I could remove mountains, but have not charity, I am
   nothing." [4232] He comes to still greater things, Brethren. What else
   has he said? "If I should distribute all my goods to the poor." What
   more perfect thing can be done? When indeed the Lord commanded the rich
   man this for perfection's sake, saying, "If thou wilt be perfect, go,
   sell all that thou hast, and give to the poor." [4233] Was he then at
   once perfect, because he sold all his goods and gave them to the poor?
   No; and therefore He added, "And come, follow Me." "Sell all," saith
   He, "give to the poor, and come, follow Me." "Why should I follow Thee?
   Now that I have sold all, and distributed to the poor, am I not
   perfect? What need is there that I should follow Thee?" "Follow Me,"
   that thou mayest learn that "I am meek and lowly in heart." For what?
   can any man sell all he hath, and give to the poor, who is not yet
   meek, not yet lowly in heart? Assuredly he can. "For if I should
   distribute all my goods to the poor." And hear still further. For some,
   who had left all they had and had already followed the Lord, but not
   yet followed Him perfectly (for to follow Him perfectly is to imitate
   Him), could not bear the trial of suffering. Peter, Brethren, was
   already one of those who had left all and followed the Lord. For as
   that rich man went away in sadness, when the disciples bring troubled,
   asked how then any one could be perfect, and the Lord consoled them,
   they said to the Lord, "Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed
   Thee; what shall we have therefore?" [4234] And the Lord told them what
   He would give them here, what He would reserve for them hereafter. Now
   Peter was already of the number of those who had so done. But when it
   came to the crisis [4235] of suffering, at the voice of a maid-servant
   he denied Him thrice with whom he had promised that he was ready to
   die.

   10. Take good heed then, Beloved: "Go," saith He, "sell all that thou
   hast, give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven, and
   come, follow Me." Peter is perfect, now that the Lord sitteth in heaven
   at the right Hand of the Father, then did he attain perfection and
   maturity. For when he followed the Lord to His Passion, he was not
   perfect; but when there began to be no one on earth for him to follow,
   then was he perfected. But thou truly hast always One before thee to
   follow; the Lord hath set up an example on earth, when He left the
   Gospel with thee, in the Gospel He is with thee. For He did not speak
   falsely when He said, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of
   the world." [4236] Therefore follow the Lord. What is, "Follow the
   Lord"? Imitate the Lord. What is, "Imitate the Lord"? "Learn of Me,
   that I am meek and lowly in heart." Because if I should distribute all
   my goods to the poor, and give up my body to be burned, but not have
   charity, it profiteth me nothing. To this charity then I exhort your
   Charity; now I should not exhort to charity, but with some charity. I
   exhort then that what is commenced may be filled up; and pray that what
   is begun may be perfected. And I beg that ye would offer this prayer
   for me, that what I advise may be perfected in me also. For we are all
   now imperfect, and there shall we be perfected, where all things are
   perfect. The Apostle Paul says, "Brethren, I do not reckon myself to
   have apprehended." [4237] He says, "Not that I have already attained,
   either am already perfect." [4238] And shall any man dare to vaunt
   himself on perfection? Yea rather let us acknowledge our imperfection,
   that we may attain [4239] perfection.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4201] John xiv. 6.

   [4202] Ps. cxxxix. 6, Sept. (cxl. 5, English version).

   [4203] Ecclus. ix. 13.

   [4204] Jas. iv. 4.

   [4205] Matt. vii. 3.

   [4206] Quæ ibat effusa redit confusa.

   [4207] Ps. lxxxii. 17, Sept. (lxxxiii. 16, English version).

   [4208] Ps. lxxvii. 39, Sept. (lxxviii. English version).

   [4209] Zech. i. 3.

   [4210] Tract. 2 in Evang. Joan. n. 8.

   [4211] Matt. vii. 13.

   [4212] Vexat.

   [4213] Certus.

   [4214] John xiv. 6.

   [4215] John x. 7.

   [4216] Matt. xi. 27.

   [4217] Rom. v. 6.

   [4218] Rom. viii. 32.

   [4219] Matt. xx. 22.

   [4220] Matt. xi. 27.

   [4221] Matt. xi. 28, 29.

   [4222] Luke x. 17.

   [4223] Luke x. 20.

   [4224] 2 Kings iv. and v.

   [4225] Meruerunt.

   [4226] Matt. vii. 22.

   [4227] Matt. vii. 23.

   [4228] Sincerissimam.

   [4229] 1 Cor. xiii. 4.

   [4230] Matt. xi. 29.

   [4231] Sacramenta.

   [4232] 1 Cor. xiii. 1, etc.

   [4233] Matt. xix. 21.

   [4234] Matt. xix. 27.

   [4235] Articulum.

   [4236] Matt. xxviii. 20.

   [4237] Phil. iii. 13.

   [4238] Phil. iii. 12.

   [4239] Mereamur.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XCIII.

   [CXLIII. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John xvi. 7, "I tell you the truth; it is
   expedient for you that I go away," etc.

   1. The medicine for all the wounds of the soul, and the one
   propitiation for the offences of men, is to believe on Christ; nor can
   any one be cleansed at all, whether from original sin which he derived
   from Adam, [4240] in whom all men have sinned, and become by nature
   children of wrath; or from the sins which they have themselves added,
   by not resisting the concupiscence of the flesh, but by following and
   serving it in unclean and injurious deeds: unless by faith they are
   united and compacted into His Body, who was conceived without any
   enticement of the flesh and deadly pleasure, and whom His Mother
   nourished in her womb without sin, and "Who did no sin, neither was
   deceit found in His Mouth." [4241] They verily who believe on Him,
   become the children of God; because they are born of God by the grace
   of adoption, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ our Lord. Wherefore,
   dearly Beloved, it is with good reason that the same Lord and our
   Saviour mentions this one sin only, of which the Holy Ghost convinces
   the world, that it believeth not on Him. "I tell you the truth," He
   saith, "It is expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away,
   the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send Him
   unto you. And when He shall come, He will convince the world of sin,
   and of righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not
   on Me. Of righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye shall see
   Me no more. Of judgment, because the prince of this world is already
   judged." [4242]

   2. Of this one only sin then He would have the world to be convinced,
   that they believe not on Him; to wit, because by believing on Him all
   sins are loosed, He would have this one imputed by which the rest are
   bound. And because by believing they are born of God, and become
   children of God; "For," saith he, "to them gave He power to become the
   sons of God, to them that believe on Him." [4243] Whoso then believeth
   on the Son of God, in so far as he adhereth to Him, and becometh
   himself also by adoption a son and heir of God, and a joint-heir with
   Christ, in so far he sinneth not. Whence John saith, "Whosoever is born
   of God sinneth not." [4244] And therefore the sin of which the world is
   convinced is this, that they believe not on Him. This is the sin of
   which He also saith, "If I had not come, they had not had sin." [4245]
   For what! had they not innumerable other sins? But by His coming this
   one sin was added to them that believed not, by which the rest should
   be retained. Whereas in them that believe, because this one was
   wanting, it was brought to pass that all should be remitted to them
   that believe. Nor is it with any other view that the Apostle Paul
   saith, "All have sinned, and have need of the glory of God; [4246] that
   "whosoever believeth on Him, should not be confounded;" [4247] as the
   Psalm also saith "Come ye unto Him, and be enlightened, and your faces
   shall not be confounded." [4248] Whoso then glorieth in himself shall
   be confounded; for he shall not be found without sins. Accordingly he
   only shall not be confounded who glorieth in the Lord. "For all have
   sinned, and have need of the glory of God." And so when he was speaking
   of the infidelity of the Jews, he did not say, "For if some of them
   have sinned, shall their sin make the faith of God of none effect?" For
   how should he say, "If some of them have sinned;" when he said himself,
   "For all have sinned"? But he said, "If some of them believed not,
   shall their unbelief make the faith of God of none effect?" [4249] That
   he might point out more expressly this sin, by which alone the door is
   closed against the rest that they by the grace of God should not be
   remitted. Of which one sin by the coming of the Holy Ghost, that is by
   the gift of His grace, which is granted to the faithful, the world is
   convinced, in the Lord's words, "Of sin, because they believed not on
   Me."

   3. Now there would be no great merit and glorious blessedness in
   believing, if the Lord had always appeared in His Risen Body to the
   eyes of men. The Holy Ghost then hath brought this great gift to them
   that should believe, that Him whom they should not see with the eyes of
   flesh, they might with a mind sobered from carnal desires, and
   inebriated with spiritual longings, sigh after. Whence it was that when
   that disciple who had said that he would not believe, unless he touched
   with the hands His Scars, after he had handled the Lord's Body, cried
   out as though awaking from sleep, "My Lord and my God;" the Lord said
   to him, "Because thou hast seen Me, thou hast believed; blessed are
   they that have not seen, and yet have believed." [4250] This
   blessedness hath the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, brought to us, that the
   form of a servant which He took from the Virgin's womb, being removed
   from the eyes of flesh, the purified eye of the mind might be directed
   to This Form of God, in which He continued equal with the Father, even
   when He vouchsafed to appear in the Flesh; so as that with the Same
   Spirit filled the Apostle might say, "Though we have known Christ after
   the flesh; yet now we know Him so no longer." [4251] Because even the
   Flesh of Christ he knew not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, who,
   not by touching in curiosity, but in believing assured, acknowledgeth
   the power of His Resurrection; not saying in his heart, "Who hath
   ascended into heaven? that is, to bring Christ down; or, Who hath
   descended into the deep? that is, to bring back Christ from the dead."
   "But," saith he, "the word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, that Jesus is
   the Lord; and if thou shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised
   Him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man
   believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made
   unto salvation." [4252] These, Brethren, are the words of the Apostle,
   pouring them forth with the holy inebriation of the Holy Ghost Himself.

   4. Forasmuch then as we could in no way have had this blessedness by
   which we see not and yet believe, unless we received it of the Holy
   Ghost; it is with good reason said, "It is expedient for you that I go
   away. For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but
   if I depart, I will send Him unto you." [4253] By His Divinity indeed
   He is with us always; but unless He had in Body gone away from us, we
   had always seen His Body after the flesh. and never believed after a
   spiritual sort; by the which belief justified and blessed we might
   attain [4254] with cleansed hearts to contemplate the Very Word, God
   with God, "by whom all things were made," and "who was made Flesh, that
   He might dwell among us." And if not with the contact of the hand, but
   "with the heart man believeth unto righteousness;" with good reason is
   the world, which will not believe save what it sees, convinced of our
   righteousness. Now that we might have that righteousness of faith of
   which the unbelieving world should be convinced, therefore said the
   Lord, "Of righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye shall see
   Me no more." As if He had said, "This shall be your righteousness, that
   ye believe on Me, the Mediator, of whom ye shall be most fully assured
   that He is risen again and gone to the Father, though ye see Him not
   after the Flesh; that by Him reconciled, ye may be able to see God
   after the Spirit." Whence He saith to the woman who represents the
   Church, when she fell at His Feet after His Resurrection, "Touch Me
   not, for I am not yet ascended to the Father." [4255] Which expression
   is understood mystically, thus. "Believe not in Me after a carnal
   manner by means of bodily contact; but thou shalt believe after a
   spiritual manner; that is, with a spiritual faith shalt touch Me, when
   I shall have ascended to the Father." For, "blessed are they who do not
   see, and believe." And this is the righteousness of faith, of which the
   world, which hath it not, is convinced of us who are not without it;
   for "the just liveth by faith." [4256] Whether it be then that as
   rising again in Him, and in Him coming to the Father, we are invisibly
   and in justification perfected; or that as not seeing and yet believing
   we live by faith, for that "the just liveth by faith;" with these
   meanings said He, "Of righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye
   shall see Me no more."

   5. Nor let the world excuse itself by this, that it is hindered by the
   devil from believing on Christ. For to believers the prince of the
   world is cast out, [4257] that he work no more in the hearts of men
   whom Christ hath begun to possess by faith; as he worketh in the
   children of unbelief; [4258] whom he is constantly stirring up to tempt
   and disturb the righteous. For because he is cast out, who once had
   dominion interiorly he wageth war exteriorly. Although then by means of
   his persecutions, "the Lord doth direct the meek in judgment;" [4259]
   nevertheless in this very fact of his being cast out, is he "judged
   already." And of this, "judgment" is the world convinced; for in vain
   doth he who will not believe on Christ complain of the devil whom,
   judged, that is, cast out, and for the exercising of us allowed to
   attack us from without, not only men, but even women, and boys, and
   girls, Martyrs have overcome. Now in whom have they overcome, but in
   Him on whom they have believed, and whom seeing not, they loved, and by
   whose dominion in their hearts they have got rid of a most oppressive
   [4260] lord. And all this by grace, by the gift, that is, of the Holy
   Ghost. Rightly then doth the Same Spirit convince the world, both of
   "sin," because it believeth not on Christ; "and of righteousness,"
   because they who have had the will have believed, though Him on whom
   they believed they saw not; and by His Resurrection have hoped that
   themselves also should be in the resurrection perfected; "and of
   judgment," because if they had had the will to believe, they could be
   hindered by none, "for that the prince of this world hath been judged
   already."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4240] Ps. li. 5.

   [4241] 1 Pet. ii. 22.

   [4242] John xvi. 7-11.

   [4243] John i. 12.

   [4244] 1 John iii. 9.

   [4245] John xv. 22.

   [4246] Rom. iii. 23.

   [4247] Rom. ix. 33.

   [4248] Ps. xxxiii. 6, Sept. (xxxiv. 5, English version).

   [4249] Rom. iii. 3.

   [4250] John xx. 29.

   [4251] 2 Cor. v. 16.

   [4252] Rom. x. 6, etc.

   [4253] John xvi. 7.

   [4254] Mereremur.

   [4255] John xx. 17.

   [4256] Hab. ii. 4; Rom. i. 17.

   [4257] John xii. 31.

   [4258] Eph. ii. 2.

   [4259] Ps. xxv. 9.

   [4260] Pessimo.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XCIV.

   [CXLIV. Ben.]

   On the same words of the Gospel, John xvi. 8, "He will convict the
   world in respect of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgement."

   1. When our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ was speaking at length of the
   coming of the Holy Ghost, He said among the rest, "He shall convince
   the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment." [4261] Nor
   when He had said this, did He pass on to another subject; but
   vouchsafed to convey a somewhat more explicit notice of this same
   truth. "Of sin," said He, "because they believed not on Me. Of
   righteousness, because I go to the Father. Of judgment, because the
   prince of this world hath been judged already." [4262] There arises
   therefore within us a desire of understanding, why as if it were men's
   only sin, not to believe on Christ, He said it of this alone, that the
   Holy Ghost should convince the world; but if it is plain that besides
   this unbelief there are manifold other sins of men, why of this alone
   should the Holy Ghost convince the world? Is it because all sins are by
   unbelief retained, by faith remitted; that therefore God imputeth this
   one above all the rest, by which it comes to pass that the rest are not
   loosed, so long as proud man believes not in an Humbled God? For so it
   is written; "God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the
   humble." [4263] Now this grace of God is a gift of God. But the
   greatest gift is the Holy Ghost Himself; and therefore is it called
   grace. For forasmuch "as all had sinned, and needed the glory of God;
   because by one man sin entered into the world, and death by his sin in
   whom all have sinned;" [4264] therefore is it grace because given
   gratuitously. And therefore is it given gratuitously, because it is not
   rendered as a reward after a strict scrutiny of deserts, but given as a
   gift after the pardon of sins.

   2. Therefore of sin are unbelievers, that is, the lovers of the world,
   convinced; for they are signified by the name of the world. For when it
   is said, "He will convince the world of sin;" it is of none other sin
   than that they have not believed on Christ. For if this sin exist not,
   no sins will remain, because when the just man lives by faith, all are
   loosed. Now the difference is great as to whether one believe that
   Jesus is Christ, or whether he believe on Christ. For that Jesus is
   Christ even the devils believed, and yet the devils believed not on
   Christ. For he believeth on Christ, who both hopeth in Christ and
   loveth Christ. For if he have faith without hope and love, he believeth
   that Christ is, but he doth not believe on Christ. Whoso then believeth
   on Christ, by believing on Christ, Christ cometh unto him, and in a
   manner uniteth Himself to him, and he is made a member in His Body.
   Which cannot be, but by the accession of hope and love.

   3. What mean again His words, "Of righteousness, because I go to the
   Father"? And first must we enquire, if the world is convinced of sin,
   why it is also of righteousness? For who can rightly be convinced of
   righteousness? Is it indeed that the world is convinced of its own sin,
   but of Christ's righteousness? I do not see what else can be
   understood; since He saith, "Of sin, because they believed not on Me.
   Of righteousness, because I go to the Father." They believed not, He
   goeth to the Father. Their sin therefore, and His righteousness. But
   why would He name righteousness in this only, that He goeth to the
   Father? Is it not righteousness also that He came hither from the
   Father? Or is that rather mercy, that He came from the Father to us,
   and righteousness, that He goeth to the Father?

   4. So, Brethren, I think it expedient, that in so profound a depth of
   Scripture, in words, wherein peradventure there lies some hidden truth
   which may in due season be laid open, we should as it were together
   enquire faithfully, that we may attain [4265] to find healthfully. Why
   then doth He call this righteousness, in that He goeth to the Father,
   and not also in that He came from the Father? Is it that in that it is
   mercy that He came, therefore it is righteousness that He goeth? that
   so in our own case too we may learn that righteousness cannot be
   fulfilled in us, if we are slow to give a place first [4266] to mercy,
   "not seeking our own things, but the things of others also." Which
   advice when the Apostle had given, he immediately joined to it the
   example of our Lord Himself; "Doing nothing," saith he, "through strife
   or vain glory; but in lowliness of mind, each esteeming the other
   better than themselves. Not looking every man on his own things, but
   also on the things of others." Then he added immediately, "Let this
   mind be in each of you which was also in Christ Jesus, who, being in
   the Form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but
   emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the
   likeness of men, and found in fashion as a man; He humbled Himself,
   having become obedient even unto death, yea the death of the cross."
   [4267] This is the mercy whereby He came from the Father. What then is
   the righteousness whereby He goeth to the Father? He goes on and says;
   "Wherefore God also hath exalted Him, and given Him a Name which is
   above every name; that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
   things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and
   that every tongue should confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the
   Glory of God the Father." This is the righteousness whereby He goeth to
   the Father.

   5. But if He Alone goeth to the Father, what doth it profit us? Why is
   the world convinced by the Holy Ghost of this righteousness? And yet if
   He did not Alone go to the Father, He would not say in another place,
   "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but He That descended from heaven,
   the Son of man who is in heaven." [4268] But the Apostle Paul also
   says, "For our conversation is in heaven." [4269] And why is this?
   Because he also says, "If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things
   which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Mind
   the things which are above, not those which are upon the earth. For ye
   are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God." [4270] How then is
   He Alone? Is He therefore Alone because Christ with all His members is
   One, as the Head with His Body? Now what is His Body, but the Church?
   As the same teacher says, "Now ye are the Body of Christ, and members
   in particular." [4271] Forasmuch then as we have fallen, and He
   descended for our sakes, what is, "No man hath ascended, but He That
   descended;" but that no man hath ascended, except as made one with Him,
   and as a member fastened into His Body who descended? And thus He saith
   to His disciples, "Without Me ye can do nothing." [4272] For in one way
   is He One with the Father, and in another one with us. He is One with
   the Father, in that the Substance of the Father and the Son is One; He
   is One with the Father, in that, "Being in the Form of God, He thought
   it not robbery to be equal with God." But He was made One with us, in
   that "He emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant;" He was made
   one with us, according to the seed of Abraham, "in whom all nations
   shall be blessed." Which place when the Apostle had brought forward, he
   said, "He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to
   thy Seed, which is Christ." [4273] And for that we too belong to that
   which is Christ, by our incorporation together, and coherence to That
   Head, It is One Christ. And also for that he says to us too, "Therefore
   are ye Abraham's seed, heirs according to the promise." [4274] For if
   the seed of Abraham be One, and That One Seed of Abraham can only be
   understood of Christ; but this seed of Abraham we also are; therefore
   This Whole, that is, the Head and the Body, is One Christ.

   6. And therefore we ought not to deem ourselves separated from that
   righteousness, which the Lord Himself makes mention of, saying, "Of
   righteousness, because I go to the Father." For we too have risen with
   Christ, and we are with Christ our Head, now for a while [4275] by
   faith and hope; but our hope will be completed in the last resurrection
   of the dead. But when our hope shall be completed, then shall our
   justification be completed also. And the Lord who was to complete it
   showed us in His Own Flesh (that is, in our Head), Wherein He rose
   again and ascended to the Father, what we ought to hope for. For that
   thus it is written, "He was delivered for our sins, and rose again for
   our justification." [4276] The world then is convinced "of sin" in
   those who believe not on Christ; "and of righteousness," in those who
   rise again in the members of Christ. Whence it is said, "That we may be
   the righteousness of God in him." [4277] For if not in Him, in no way
   righteousness. But if in Him, He goeth with us Whole to the Father, and
   this perfect righteousness will be fulfilled in us. And therefore "of
   judgment" too is the world convinced, "because the prince of this world
   hath been judged already;" that is, the devil, the prince of the
   unrighteous, who in heart inhabit only in this world which they love,
   and therefore are called "the world;" as our conversation is in heaven,
   if we have risen again with Christ. Therefore as Christ together with
   us, that is His Body, is One; so the devil with all the ungodly whose
   head he is, with as it were his own body, is one. Wherefore as we are
   not separated from the righteousness, of which the Lord said, "Because
   I go to the Father;" so the ungodly are not separated from that
   judgment, of which He said, "Because the prince of this world hath been
   judged already."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4261] John xvi. 8.

   [4262] John xvi. 9-11.

   [4263] Prov. iii. 34; Jas. iv. 6.

   [4264] Rom. iii. 23, v. 12.

   [4265] Mereamur.

   [4266] Prærogare.

   [4267] Phil. ii. 3, etc.

   [4268] John iii. 13.

   [4269] Phil. iii. 20.

   [4270] Col. iii. 1-3.

   [4271] 1 Cor. xii. 27.

   [4272] John xv. 5.

   [4273] Gal. iii. 16.

   [4274] Gal. iii. 29.

   [4275] Interim.

   [4276] Rom. iv. 25.

   [4277] 2 Cor. v. 21.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XCV.

   [CXLV. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John xvi. 24, "Hitherto have ye asked
   nothing in my name;" and on the words of Luke x. 17, "Lord, even the
   demons are subject unto us in thy name."

   1. When the Holy Gospel was being read, we heard what in truth ought at
   once to put every earnest soul in motion to seek, not to faint. For
   whoso is not moved, is not changed. But there is a dangerous movement,
   of which it is written, "Suffer not my feet to be moved." [4278] But
   there is another movement of him who seeketh, knocketh, asketh. What
   then has been read we have all heard; but I suppose we have not all
   understood. It makes mention of that which together with me ye should
   seek, with me ask, for the receiving of which ye should with me knock.
   For as I hope the grace of the Lord will be with us, that whereas I
   wish to minister to you, I too may be thought [4279] worthy to receive.
   What is it, I pray you, that we have just heard that the Lord said to
   His disciples? "Hitherto have ye asked nothing in My Name." [4280] Is
   He not speaking to those disciples, who, after He had sent them, having
   given them power to preach the Gospel, and to do mighty works, returned
   with joy, and said to Him, "Lord, even the devils are subject unto us
   through Thy Name"? [4281] Ye recognise, ye recollect this which I have
   quoted from the Gospel, which in every passage and every sentence
   speaketh truth, nowhere false, nowhere deceiveth. How then is it true,
   "Hitherto have ye asked nothing in My Name"? and, "Lord, even the
   devils are subject unto us through Thy name"? Of a surety this puts the
   mind in motion to ascertain the secret of this difficulty. Therefore
   ask we, seek, knock. Be there in us faithful godliness, not a
   restlessness of the flesh, but a submission of the mind, that He who
   seeth us knocking may open unto us.

   2. What the Lord then may give to be ministered unto you, do ye with
   earnest attention, that is, with hunger, receive; and when I shall have
   spoken it, ye will doubtless with sound taste [4282] approve what is
   placed before you out of the Lord's store. The Lord Jesus knew whereby
   the soul of man, that is, the rational mind, made after the image of
   God, could be satisfied: only, that is, by Himself. This He knew, and
   knew that it was as yet without that fulness. He knew that He was
   manifest, and He knew that He was hidden. He knew what in Him was
   exhibited, what concealed. He knew all this. "How great," says the
   Psalm, "is the multitude of Thy sweetness, O Lord, which Thou hast
   hidden to them that fear Thee; which Thou hast wrought for them that
   hope in Thee!" [4283] "Thy sweetness" both great and manifold "hast
   Thou hidden to them that fear Thee." If thou hidest it to them that
   fear Thee, to whom dost Thou open it? "Thou hast wrought it for them
   that hope in Thee." A twofold question has arisen, but either is solved
   by the other. If any one inquires after the other, what is this, "Thou
   hast hidden it to them that fear Thee; wrought it for them that hope in
   Thee"? Are they that fear, and they that hope, different? Do not the
   very same who fear God, hope in God? Who hopeth on Him who doth not
   fear Him? Who in a godly sort feareth Him, and hath not hope in Him?
   Let this then first be solved. Somewhat would I say concerning those
   who hope and those who fear.

   3. The Law hath fear, Grace hope. But what difference is there between
   the Law and Grace, since the Giver both of the Law and Grace is One?
   The Law alarmeth him who relieth on himself, Grace assisteth him who
   trusteth in God. The Law, I say, alarmeth; do not make light of this
   because it is brief; weigh it well, and it is considerable. Look well
   at what I have said, take what we minister, prove wherefrom we take it.
   The Law alarmeth him who relieth on himself, Grace assisteth him who
   trusteth in God. What saith the Law? Many things: and who can enumerate
   them? I bring forward one small and short precept from it which the
   Apostle hath brought forward, a very small one; let us see who is
   sufficient [4284] for it. "Thou shalt not lust." [4285] What is this,
   Brethren? We have heard the Law; if there be no grace, thou hast heard
   thy punishment. Why dost thou boast to me whosoever thou art that
   hearing this dost rely upon thyself, why dost thou boast to me of
   innocence? Why dost thou flatter thyself thereupon? Thou canst say, "I
   have not plundered the goods of others;" I hear, I believe, perhaps I
   even see it, thou dost not plunder the goods of others. Thou hast
   heard, "Thou shalt not lust." "I do not go in to another man's wife;"
   this again I hear, believe, see. Thou hast heard, "Thou shalt not
   lust." Why dost thou inspect thyself all round without, and dost not
   inspect within? Look in, and thou wilt see another law in thy members.
   Look in, why dost thou pass over thyself? Descend into thine own self.
   Thou wilt "see another law in thy members resisting the law of thy
   mind, and bringing thee into captivity in the law of sin which is in
   thy members." [4286] With good reason then is the sweetness of God
   hidden to thee. The law placed in thy members, resisting the law of thy
   mind, bringeth thee into captivity. Of that sweetness which to thee is
   hidden, the holy Angels drink; thou canst not drink and taste that
   sweetness, captive as thou art. "Thou hadst not known concupiscence,
   unless the Law had said, Thou shalt not lust." Thou heardest, fearedst,
   didst try to fight, couldest not overcome. For "sin taking occasion by
   the commandment wrought death." Surely ye recognise them, they are the
   Apostle's words. "Sin taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me
   all manner of concupiscence." [4287] Why didst thou vaunt thyself in
   thy pride? Lo, with thine own arms hath the enemy conquered thee. Thou
   verily, didst look for a commandment as a defence: and, lo, by the
   commandment the enemy hath found an occasion of entering in. "For sin
   taking occasion by the commandment," he saith, "deceived me, and by it
   slew me." [4288] What means what I said, "With thine own arms hath the
   enemy conquered thee"? Hear the same Apostle going on, and saying;
   "Wherefore the Law indeed is holy, and the commandment holy, and just,
   and good." [4289] Make answer now to the revilers [4290] of the Law:
   make answer on the Apostle's authority, "The commandment is holy, the
   Law holy, the commandment just and good. Was then that which is good,
   made death unto me? God forbid! But sin that it might appear sin, by
   that which is good wrought death in me." [4291] Why is this but because
   on receiving the commandment thou didst fear, not love? Thou fearedst
   punishment, thou didst not love righteousness. Whoso feareth
   punishment, wisheth, if it were possible, to do what pleaseth him, and
   not to have what he feareth. God forbiddeth adultery, thou hast coveted
   another's wife, thou dost not go in unto her, thou dost not do so,
   opportunity is given thee, thou hast time, a favourable place is open,
   witnesses are absent, yet thou dost not do it, wherefore? Because thou
   fearest the punishment. But no one will know it. Will not God know it?
   So it is clear, because God knoweth what thou art about to do, thou
   doest it not; but here thou fearest the threatenings of God, not lovest
   His commandments. Why dost thou not do it? Because if thou do, thou
   wilt be cast into hell fire. It is the fire thou fearest. O if thou
   didst love chastity, thou wouldest not do it, even though thou mightest
   be altogether unpunished. If God were to say to thee, "Lo, do it, I
   will not condemn thee, I will not condemn thee to hell fire, but I will
   withhold My Face from thee." If thou did it not because of this threat,
   it would be from the love of God that thou didst not do it, not from
   the fear of judgment. But thou wouldest do it, perhaps I mean thou
   wouldest do so; for it is not my place to judge. If thou do it not on
   this principle because thou abhorrest the contamination of adultery,
   because thou lovest His precepts, that thou mayest obtain [4292] His
   promises, and not because thou fearest His condemnation, it is the
   grace which maketh saints that aideth thee; it is all of grace, ascribe
   it not to thine own self, attribute it not to thine own strength. Thou
   actest from delight in it, well; thou actest in charity, well; I
   assent, I agree. Charity worketh by thee, when thou actest with thy
   will. At once dost thou taste sweetness, if thou hope on the Lord.

   4. But whence hast thou this charity, if yet thou hast it? for I am
   afraid lest even yet it is through fear thou doest it not, and lest
   thou seem great in thine own eyes. Now if it is through charity that
   thou doest it not, thou art truly great. Hast thou charity? "I have,"
   you say. Whence? "From myself." Far art thou from sweetness, if thou
   hast it from thine own self. Thou wilt love thine own self, because
   thou wilt love that from which thou hast it. But I will convict thee
   that thou hast it not. For in that thou dost think that thou hast so
   great a thing from thine own self, by that very fact I do not believe
   thou hast it. For if thou hadst, thou wouldest know from whence thou
   hadst it. Hast thou charity from thyself, as if it were some light,
   some little thing? "If thou shouldest speak with the tongues of men and
   Angels, but have not charity, thou wouldest be a sounding brass and a
   tinkling cymbal. If thou shouldest know all mysteries, and have all
   knowledge, and all prophecy, and all faith so that thou couldest remove
   mountains, but not have charity," these things could not profit thee.
   "If thou shouldest distribute all thy goods to the poor, and deliver up
   thy body to be burned, but not have charity, thou wouldest be nothing."
   [4293] How great is this charity, which if it be wanting, all things
   profit nothing! Compare it not to thy faith, not to thy knowledge, not
   to thy gift of tongues, [4294] to lesser things, to the eye of thy
   body, the hand, the foot, the belly, to any one lowest member compare
   charity, are these least things to be in any way compared to charity?
   So then the eye and nose thou hast from God, and hast thou charity from
   thine own self? If thou hast given thyself charity which surpasseth all
   things, thou hast made God of light account with thee. What more can
   God give thee? Whatever He may have given, is less. Charity which thou
   hast given thyself, surpasseth all things. But if thou hast it, thou
   hast not given it to thyself. "For what hast thou which thou hast not
   received?" [4295] Who gave to me, who gave to thee? God. Acknowledge
   Him in His gifts, that thou feel not His condemnation. By believing the
   Scriptures, God hath given thee charity, a great boon, charity, which
   surpasseth all things. God gave it thee, "because the charity of God
   hath been shed abroad in our hearts;" by thine own self, perhaps? God
   forbid; "by the Holy Ghost, who hath been given us." [4296]

   5. Return with me to that captive, return with me to my proposition.
   "The Law alarmeth him that relieth on himself, grace assisteth him who
   trusteth in God." For look at that captive. "He seeth another law in
   his members resisting the law of his mind, and leading him captive in
   the law of sin, which is in his members." [4297] Lo, he is bound, lo,
   he is dragged along, lo, he is led captive, lo, he is subjected. What
   hath that profited him, "Thou shalt not lust"? He hath heard, "Thou
   shalt not lust;" that he might know his enemy, not that he might
   overcome him. "For he had not known concupiscence," that is, his enemy,
   "unless the Law had said, Thou shalt not lust." [4298] Now thou hast
   seen the enemy, fight, deliver thyself, make good thy liberty, let the
   suggestions of pleasure be kept down, unlawful delight be utterly
   destroyed. Arm thyself, thou hast the Law, march on, conquer if thou
   canst. For what good is it that through the little portion of God's
   grace thou hast already, thou "delightest in the Law of God after the
   inward man? But thou seest another law in thy members resisting the law
   of thy mind;" not "resisting" yet powerless for aught, but "leading
   thee captive in the law of sin." Behold, whence to thee who fearest
   that "plentifulness of sweetness is hidden!" to him that feareth it "is
   hidden," how is it" wrought" out for him that "trusteth"? [4299] Cry
   out under thine enemy, for that thou hast an assailant, thou hast an
   Helper too, who looketh upon thee as thou fightest, who helpeth thee in
   difficulty; but only if He find thee "trusting;" for the proud He
   hateth. What then wilt thou cry under this enemy? "Wretched man that I
   am!" [4300] Ye see it already, for ye have cried out. Be this your cry,
   when haply thou art distressed under the enemy, say ye, in your inmost
   heart say, in sound faith say, "Wretched man that I am!" Wretched that
   I am! "Therefore wretched," because "I." "Wretched man that I am," both
   because "I," and because "man." For "he is disquieted in vain." [4301]
   For though "man walketh in the Image;" [4302] yet, "wretched man that I
   am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" Wilt thou
   thyself? where is thy strength, where is thy confidence? Of a surety
   thou both criest out, and art silent; silent, that is, from extolling
   thyself, not from calling upon God. Be silent, and cry out. For God
   Himself too is both silent, and crieth aloud; He is silent from
   judgment, He is not silent from precept; so be thou too silent from
   elation, not from invocation; lest God say to thee, "I have been
   silent, shall I be silent always?" [4303] Cry out therefore, "O
   wretched man that I am!" Acknowledge thyself conquered, put thine own
   strength to shame, and say, "Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
   me from the body of this death?" What did I say above? The Law alarmeth
   him that relieth upon himself. Behold, man relied upon himself, he
   attempted to fight, he could not get the better, he was conquered,
   prostrated, subjugated, led captive. He learnt to rely upon God, and it
   remaineth that him whom the Law alarmed while he relied upon himself,
   grace should assist now that he trusteth in God. In this confidence he
   saith, "Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? The grace of
   God by Jesus Christ our Lord." [4304] Now see the sweetness, taste it,
   relish it; hear the Psalm, "Taste and see that the Lord is sweet."
   [4305] He hath become sweet to thee, for that He hath delivered thee.
   Thou wast bitter to thine own self, when thou didst rely upon thyself.
   Drink sweetness, receive the earnest of so great abundance.

   6. The disciples then of the Lord Jesus Christ while yet under the Law
   had to be cleansed still, to be nourished still, to be corrected still,
   to be directed still. For they still had concupiscence; whereas the Law
   saith, "Thou shalt not lust." [4306] Without offence to those holy
   rams, the leaders of the flock, without offence to them I would say it,
   for I say the truth: the Gospel relates, that they contended which of
   them should be the greatest, and whilst the Lord was yet on earth, they
   were agitated by a dissension about pre-eminence. [4307] Whence was
   this, but from the old leaven? whence, but from the law in the members,
   resisting the law of the mind? They sought for eminence; yea, they
   desired it; they thought which should be the greatest; therefore is
   their pride put to shame by a little child. [4308] Jesus calleth unto
   him the age of humility to tame the swelling desire. With good reason
   then when they returned too, and said, "Lord, behold even the devils
   are subject unto us through Thy Name." (It was for a nothing that they
   rejoiced; of what importance was it compared to that which God
   promised?) The Lord, the Good Master, quieting fear, and building up a
   firm support, said to them, "In this rejoice not that the devils are
   subject unto you." Why so? Because "many will come in My Name, saying,
   Behold, in Thy Name we have cast out devils; and I will say to them, I
   know you not. In this rejoice not, but rejoice because your names are
   written in heaven." [4309] Ye cannot yet be there, yet notwithstanding
   ye are already written there. Therefore "rejoice." So that place again,
   "Hitherto have ye asked nothing in My Name." [4310] For what ye have
   asked, in comparison with that which I am willing to give, is nothing.
   For what have ye asked in My Name? That the devils should be subject
   unto you? "In this rejoice not," that is, what ye have asked is
   nothing; for if it were anything, He would bid them rejoice. So then it
   was not absolutely nothing, but that it was little in comparison of
   that greatness of God's rewards. For the Apostle Paul was not really
   not anything; and yet in comparison of God, "Neither is he that
   planteth anything, neither he that watereth." [4311] And so I say to
   you, and I say to myself, both to myself and you I say, when we ask in
   Christ's Name for these temporal things. For ye have asked undoubtedly.
   For who doth not ask? One asketh for health, if he is sick; another
   asketh for deliverance, if he is in prison; another asketh for the
   port, if he is tossed about at sea; another asketh for victory, if he
   is in conflict with an enemy; and in the Name of Christ he asketh all,
   and what he asketh is nothing. What then must be asked for? "Ask in My
   Name." [4312] And He said not what, but by the very words we understand
   what we ought to ask. "Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be
   full. Ask, and ye shall receive, in My Name." But what? Not nothing;
   but what? "That your joy may be full;" that is, ask what may suffice
   you. For when thou askest for temporal things, thou askest for nothing.
   "Whoso shall drink of this water, shall thirst again." [4313] He
   letteth down the watering pot of desire into the well, he taketh up
   whereof to drink, only that he may thirst again. "Ask, that your joy
   may be full;" that is, that ye may be satisfied, not feel delight only
   for a time. Ask what may suffice you; speak Philip's language, "Lord,
   show us the Father, and it sufficeth us." [4314] The Lord saith to you,
   "Have I been so long time with you, and have ye not known Me? Philip,
   he that seeth Me, seeth the Father also." [4315] Render then thanks to
   Christ, made weak for you that are weak, and make ready your desires
   [4316] for Christ's Divinity, to be satisfied therewith. Turn we to the
   Lord, etc.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4278] Ps. lxvi. 9.

   [4279] Merear.

   [4280] John xvi. 24.

   [4281] Luke x. 17.

   [4282] Faucibus.

   [4283] Ps. xxx. 20, Sept. (xxxi. 19, English version).

   [4284] Supportat.

   [4285] Rom. vii. 7.

   [4286] Rom. vii. 23.

   [4287] Rom. vii. 8, 13.

   [4288] Rom. vii. 11.

   [4289] Rom. vii. 12.

   [4290] The Manichæans.

   [4291] Rom. vii. 13.

   [4292] Exigas.

   [4293] 1 Cor. xiii. 1. etc.

   [4294] Linguæ tuæ.

   [4295] 1 Cor. iv. 7.

   [4296] Rom. v. 5.

   [4297] Rom. vii. 23.

   [4298] Rom. vii. 7.

   [4299] Ps. xxx. 20, Sept. (xxxi. 19, English version).

   [4300] Rom. vii. 24.

   [4301] Ps. xxxviii. 7 (xxxix. 6, English version).

   [4302] i.e. of God. Vid. Enarrat. in Ps. xxxviii.

   [4303] Isa. xlii. 14, Sept.

   [4304] Rom. vii. 24, 25, Vulgate.

   [4305] Ps. xxxiv. 8, Vulgate.

   [4306] Exod. xx. 17.

   [4307] Luke xxii. 24.

   [4308] Matt. xviii. 2.

   [4309] Luke x. 20; Matt. vii. 22.

   [4310] John xvi. 24.

   [4311] 1 Cor. iii. 7.

   [4312] John xvi. 24.

   [4313] John iv. 13.

   [4314] John xiv. 8.

   [4315] John xiv. 9, Vulgate.

   [4316] Fauces.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XCVI.

   [CXLVI. Ben.]

   On the words of the Gospel, John. xxi. 16, "Simon, son of John, lovest
   thou me?" etc.

   1. Ye have observed, beloved, that in to-day's lesson it was said by
   the Lord to Peter in a question, "Lovest thou Me?" To whom he answered,
   "Thou knowest, Lord, that I love thee." This was done a second, and a
   third time; and at each several reply, the Lord said, "Feed My lambs."
   [4317] To Peter did Christ commend His lambs to be fed, who fed even
   Peter himself. For what could Peter do for the Lord, especially now
   that He had an Immortal Body, and was about to ascend into heaven? As
   though He had said to him, "Lovest thou Me?' Herein show that thou
   lovest Me, Feed my sheep.'" So then, Brethren, do ye with obedience
   hear that ye are Christ's sheep; seeing that we on our part with fear
   hear, Feed My sheep"? If we feed with fear, and fear for the sheep;
   these sheep how ought they to fear for themselves? Let then carefulness
   be our portion, obedience yours; pastoral watchfulness our portion, the
   humility of the flock yours. Although we too who seem to speak to you
   from a higher place, are with fear beneath your feet; forasmuch as we
   know how perilous an account must be rendered of this as it were
   exalted seat. Wherefore, dearly beloved, Catholic plants, Members of
   Christ, think What a Head ye have! Children of God, think What a Father
   ye have found. Christians, think What an Inheritance is promised you.
   Not such as on earth cannot be possessed by children, save when their
   parents are dead. For no one on earth possesses a father's inheritance,
   save when he is dead. But we whilst our Father liveth shall possess
   what He shall give; for that our Father cannot die. I add more, I say
   more, and say the truth; our Father will Himself be our Inheritance.

   2. Live consistently, especially ye candidates of Christ, recently
   baptized, just regenerated, as I have admonished you before, so say I
   now, and give expression to my solicitude; for the present lesson of
   the Gospel hath forced upon me a greater fear: take heed to yourselves,
   do not imitate evil Christians. Say not I will do this, for many of the
   faithful do it. This is not to procure a defence for the soul; but to
   look out for companions unto hell. Grow ye in this floor of the Lord;
   herein ye will find good men to please you, if ye yourselves are good.
   For are ye our private property? Heretics and schismatics have made
   their own private property out of what they have stolen from the Lord,
   and would feed, not Christ's flocks, but their own against Christ. It
   is true indeed, they place His title on these their spoils, that their
   robberies may be as it were maintained by the title of His Power. What
   doeth Christ when such as these are converted, who have received the
   title of His Baptism out of the Church? He casteth out the spoiler, He
   doth not efface the title, and taketh possession of the house; because
   He hath found His title there. What need is there that He should change
   His Own Name? Do they take heed to what the Lord said to Peter, "Feed
   My lambs, feed My sheep"? Did He say to him, "Feed thy lambs;" or,
   "Feed thy sheep"? But for them who are shut out, what said He in the
   Song of Songs, unto the Church? The Spouse speaking to the Bride,
   saith, "If thou know not thyself, O thou fair one among women, go
   forth." [4318] As though He said, "I do not cast thee out, go forth, if
   thou know not thyself, O thou fair one among women,' if thou know not
   thyself in the mirror of divine Scripture, if thou give not heed, O
   thou fair woman, to the mirror which with no false lustre deceiveth
   thee; if thou know not that of thee it is said, Thy glory shall be
   above all earth;' [4319] that of thee it is said, I will give thee
   nations for thine inheritance, and the limits of the earth for thy
   possession;' [4320] and other innumerable testimonies which set forth
   the Catholic Church. If then thou know not these, thou hast no part in
   Me, thou canst not make thyself My heir. Go forth then in the footsteps
   of the flocks' not in the fellowship of the flock; and feed thy goats,
   not as it was said to Peter, My sheep.'" To Peter it was said, "My
   sheep;" to schismatics it is said," thy goats." In the one place
   "sheep," in the other "goats;" in the one place "Mine," in the other
   "thine." Recollect the right Hand and the left of our Judge; recollect
   where the goats shall stand, and where the sheep; [4321] and it will be
   plain to you where is the right hand, where the left, the white and the
   black, the lightsome, and the darksome, the fair and the deformed, that
   which is about to receive the kingdom, and that which is to find
   everlasting punishment.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4317] John xxi. 15.

   [4318] Cant. i. 8, Sept.

   [4319] Ps. lvii. 11.

   [4320] Ps. ii. 8.

   [4321] Matt. xxv. 33.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Sermon XCVII.

   [CXLVII. Ben.]

   On the same words of the Gospel of John. xxi. 15, "Simon, son of John,
   lovest thou me more than these?" etc.

   1. Ye remember that the Apostle Peter, the first of all the Apostles,
   was disturbed at the Lord's Passion. Of his own self disturbed, but by
   Christ renewed. For he was first a bold presumer, and became afterwards
   a timid denier. He had promised that he would die for the Lord, when
   the Lord was first to die for him. When he said then, "I will be with
   Thee even unto death," and "I will lay down my life for Thee;" the Lord
   answered him, "Wilt thou lay down thy life for Me? Verily I say unto
   thee, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny Me thrice." [4322] They
   came to the hour; and because that Christ was God, and Peter a man, the
   Scripture was fulfilled, "I said in my panic, Every man is a liar."
   [4323] And the Apostle says, "For God is true, and every man a liar."
   [4324] Christ true, Peter a liar.

   2. But what now? The Lord asketh him as ye heard when the Gospel was
   being read, and saith to him, "Simon, son of John, lovest thou Me more
   than these?" He answered and said, "Yea Lord Thou knowest that I love
   Thee." [4325] And again the Lord asked this question, and a third time
   He asked it. And when he asserted in reply his love, He commended to
   him the flock. For each several time the Lord Jesus said to Peter, as
   he said, "I love thee;" "Feed My lambs," feed My "little sheep." In
   this one Peter was figured the unity of all pastors, of good pastors,
   that is, who know that they feed Christ's sheep for Christ, not for
   themselves. Was Peter at this time a liar, or did he answer untruly
   that he loved the Lord? He made this answer truly; for he made answer
   of that which he saw in his own heart. Whereas when he said, "I will
   lay down my life for Thee," he would presume on future strength. Now
   every man knows it may be what sort of man he is at the time when he is
   speaking; what he shall be on the morrow, who knows? So then Peter
   turned back his eyes to his own heart, when he was asked by the Lord,
   and in confidence made answer of what he saw there: "Yea, Lord, Thou
   knowest that I love Thee.' What I tell Thee, Thou knowest; what I see
   here in my heart, Thou seest also." Nevertheless, he did not venture to
   say what the Lord had asked. For the Lord had not simply said, "Lovest
   Thou me?" but had added, "Lovest thou Me more than these?" that is,
   "Lovest thou Me more than these here do?" He was speaking of the other
   disciples; Peter could not say ought but, "I love Thee;" he did not
   venture to say, "more than these." He would not be a liar a second
   time. It were enough for him to bear testimony to his own heart; it was
   no duty of his to be judge of the heart of others.

   3. Peter then was true; or rather was Christ true in Peter? Now when
   the Lord Jesus Christ would, He abandoned Peter, and Peter was found a
   man; but when it so pleased the Lord Jesus Christ, He filled Peter, and
   Peter was found true. The Rock (Petra) made Peter true, for the Rock
   was Christ. And what did He announce to him, when he answered a third
   time that he loved Christ, and a third time the Lord commended His
   little sheep to Peter? He announced to him beforehand his suffering.
   "When thou wast young," saith He, "thou girdedst thyself, and wentest
   whither thou wouldest; but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch
   forth thine hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither
   thou wouldest not." [4326] The Evangelist hath explained to us Christ's
   meaning. "This spake He," saith he, "signifying by what death he should
   glorify God;" [4327] that is that he was crucified for Christ; for this
   is, "Thou shalt stretch forth thine hands." Where now is that denier?
   Then after this the Lord Christ said, "Follow Me." Not in the same
   sense as before, when he called the disciples. For then too He said,
   "Follow Me;" but then to instruction, now to a crown. Was he not afraid
   to be put to death when he denied Christ? He was afraid to suffer that
   which Christ suffered. But now he must be afraid no more. For he saw
   Him now Alive in the Flesh, whom he had seen hanging on the Tree. By
   His Resurrection Christ took away the fear of death; and forasmuch as
   He had taken away the fear of death, with good reason did He enquire of
   Peter's love. Fear had thrice denied, love thrice confessed. The [4328]
   threefoldness of denial, the forsaking of the Truth; the threefoldness
   of confession, the testimony of love.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [4322] Matt. xxvi. 34; Luke xxii. 33; John xiii. 37, 38.

   [4323] Ps. cxvi. 11.

   [4324] Rom. iii. 4.

   [4325] John xxi. 15.

   [4326] John xxi. 18.

   [4327] John xxi. 19.

   [4328] Trinitas.
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

INDEXES OF SUBJECTS.
     __________________________________________________________________

     __________________________________________________________________

  OUR LORD'S SERMON ON THE MOUNT.
     __________________________________________________________________


   Acyndinus, [1]21.

   Adjurations, [2]22.

   Adoption of sons, [3]32, [4]39.

   Adultery, [5]15 sqq.

   Adversary, who is the, [6]14.

   Alms, [7]35; what is meant by the "left hand," [8]36.

   Altar, meaning of, [9]12.

   Ananias, [10]28.

   Anger, [11]11.

   Anxiety, [12]41, [13]50, [14]53.

   Augustin, as an exegete, [15]vii; authority of, in the Middle Ages,
   [16]vii; knowledge of Hebrew, [17]viii; knowledge of Punic, [18]49; and
   the Vulgate, [19]ix; examples of critical notation, [20]ix; many
   interpretations of Scripture, [21]x; and a Bible Dictionary, [22]x; use
   of allegory, [23]xi.


   Battus, [24]37 (note).

   Body, serving the, [25]9.

   Bushel measure, [26]9.


   Cana, miracle of, [27]x.

   Christ, second coming of, [28]40; traditional saying of, [29]52 (note);
   the rock, [30]63.

   Christians, equality of, [31]39.

   Clement quoted, [32]14 (note).

   Commandments, the least, [33]11.

   Cyprian quoted, [34]38 (note).


   Daily bread, what it is, [35]42, [36]46.

   Devil, the, [37]14; speaking with God, [38]44.

   Divorce, [39]17-22; Woolsey on, [40]22 (note).


   Earth, meaning of, [41]4, [42]5 (note), [43]39.

   Elijah inflicting punishments, [44]28.

   Enemies to be loved, [45]18, [46]29, [47]30.

   Eucharist, [48]40, [49]42.


   Farrar on Augustin as an exegete, [50]vii.

   Farthing, the uttermost, [51]13, [52]43.

   Fasting, [53]47.

   Forgiveness, [54]43, [55]46.

   Fornication, [56]16, [57]17, [58]18, [59]20.


   Gehenna, [60]11, [61]12.

   God, omnipresence of, [62]15, [63]40; Fatherhood of, [64]39; name of,
   [65]40; kingdom of, [66]40; speaking with Satan, [67]44; agency in
   temptation, [68]45; providential care of, [69]50.

   Golden Rule, [70]59.

   Good for evil, [71]26, [72]27.

   Gregory on Job, [73]xi.


   Heart, purpose of, [74]48; a pure, [75]5, [76]34.

   Heaven, [77]8, [78]18, [79]23, [80]39, [81]40, [82]41.

   Hillel quoted, [83]59 (note).

   Holy Spirit, sevenfold operation of, [84]6, [85]63; sin against,
   [86]31; fruits of, [87]61.

   Humility, [88]4, [89]6.

   Hypocrisy, [90]35, [91]55, [92]62.


   Imprecation used for predicting future events, [93]30.

   Influence, hiding, [94]9.

   Injuries, treatment of, [95]14, [96]25, [97]28 sq.

   Iota, [98]10.


   Joy, Christian, [99]61, [100]62.

   Judgment, the, [101]11.

   Judgments, human, [102]54, [103]55.


   Kingdom of God, [104]40.


   Law, keeping the, [105]10; sum of the, [106]59; sueing at the, [107]26.

   Left hand, meaning of, [108]35, [109]36.

   Light of the world, [110]9.

   Lord's Prayer, [111]38 sqq., [112]45.

   Lord's Supper. See [113]Eucharist.

   Love, for enemies, [114]18, [115]30; for neighbour, [116]29.

   Luther quoted, [117]36 (note), [118]38 (note).


   Maimonides quoted, [119]29 (note).

   Manichæans refuted, [120]vii, [121]28, [122]60.

   Marriage, [123]17, [124]19-22.

   Meek, the, [125]4.

   Merciful, the, [126]5.

   Mount, meaning of, [127]4; on which Sermon was delivered, [128]4
   (note); the Sermon on, as a standard of life, [129]3; purpose of,
   [130]3 (note).

   Mourn, they that, [131]5.

   Murder, [132]11.


   Natures, not two original, [133]60.


   Oaths, [134]22, [135]23 (note).

   Obedience to God's will, [136]41.

   Offerings at the altar, [137]12.

   Origen quoted, [138]52 (note).


   Paraclete, the, [139]5.

   Paul reviling the high priest, [140]25.

   Peacemakers, the, [141]5.

   Persecution, [142]7.

   Prayer, secret, [143]37; standing posture in, [144]37 (note), [145]39;
   efficacy of, [146]38; facing the east in, [147]39; Mahometan's,
   [148]43; the Lord's, [149]38 sqq.

   Preaching, aim of, not a livelihood, [150]51.

   Proud, the, [151]4, [152]14.

   Providence, [153]50.

   Punishment, for sin, [154]13; degrees of, [155]27; inflicted by
   mortals, [156]28; corporeal, [157]28.

   Purity of heart, [158]5, [159]35.


   Racha, [160]viii, [161]11.

   Reconciliation, [162]12, [163]14.

   Renan, testimony to the Sermon on the Mount, [164]3 (note); on slavery,
   [165]25 (note).

   Reuss on Augustin as an exegete, [166]vii.

   Revenge, [167]24-26, [168]29.

   Reviling, [169]8.

   Righteousness, [170]10; of the Pharisees, [171]11.

   Rupert of Deutz quoted, [172]vii.


   Salt, savorless, [173]8.

   Sanctification, perfect, [174]33 (note).

   Septuagint, Augustin' s reverence for, [175]viii.

   Sermon on the Mount. See [176]Mount.

   Simon, Père, on Augustin as an exegete, [177]vii.

   Sin, degrees of, [178]12; three stages in, [179]15, [180]16;
   forgiveness of, [181]43.

   Slavery, [182]26.

   South, Robert, quoted, [183]16 (note), [184]48 (note).

   Susannah tempted, [185]44.

   Symmachus, version of, [186]viii.


   Temptation, [187]43; agent in, [188]44, [189]45.

   Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, [190]4 (note), [191]38 (note), [192]42
   (note), [193]47 (note), [194]59 (note).

   Tertullian quoted, [195]38 (note).

   Theodotion, version of, [196]viii.

   Thomas, legend of, [197]28.

   Tichonius, rules of, [198]x.

   Tittle, [199]10.

   Trench on Augustin as an exegete, [200]vii.

   Tunic, [201]26.


   Universalists, [202]13 (note).

   Unjust judge, the, [203]50.


   Webster, Daniel, testimony to the Sermon on the Mount, [204]3 (note).

   Works, good, [205]9.

   World, meaning of, [206]9.


     __________________________________________________________________

  THE HARMONY OF THE GOSPELS.
     __________________________________________________________________


   Abraham, promise to, and fulfilment, [207]93, etc.

   Adoption, nature of, [208]104.

   Andrew, and another, the first followers of our Lord, [209]121.

   Annunciation, the, [210]107, [211]109.

   Apostles, the, choosing of, [212]125; mission of, [213]136.

   Archelaus, son of King Herod, explanation of statement regarding,
   [214]114, etc.

   Ass, the, on which Christ rode, [215]159.


   Barabbas preferred to Christ, [216]193.

   Bethany, anointment of Christ in, [217]171, etc.


   Cæsar, of rendering tribute to, [218]166.

   Canaan, woman of, [219]152.

   Centurion, a, gives testimony to Christ at His death, [220]206.

   Child, children, little, an example of humility, [221]156; Christ lays
   hands on, [222]157; sing hosanna in the temple, [223]161.

   Christ, kingship and priesthood of, [224]78; His divinity, [225]79; why
   He wrote nothing Himself, [226]81; the Catholic Church testifies to His
   wisdom, [227]82; books on magic ascribed to, [228]83; magic arts
   ascribed to, [229]84; derivation of the name, [230]85; idols subverted
   by His name, [231]93; fulfilment of prophecies concerning, [232]96;
   Mediator between God and men, [233]100; His genealogy, [234]102, etc.;
   birth of, [235]102, [236]111; visits Jerusalem when twelve years old,
   [237]112; baptism of, [238]119; temptation of, [239]120; calls His
   first disciples, [240]121; leaves Nazareth and dwells at Capernaum,
   [241]121; sets apart the twelve, [242]125; His reply to the scribe who
   offered to follow Him, [243]128; calls Matthew, [244]131; His reply to
   questions about fasting, [245]133; sends forth the twelve, [246]136;
   upbraids the cities which repented not, [247]139; comes to His own
   country, [248]144; goes up unto a mountain to pray, [249]150; announces
   His passion, [250]154, [251]155, [252]169; pays tribute, [253]155;
   uttered the same saying repeatedly and in different places, [254]156;
   lays His hands on little children, [255]157; enters Jerusalem on an
   ass, [256]159; expels the buyers and sellers from the temple, [257]160;
   David's son and David's Lord, [258]167; foretells the destruction of
   the temple, [259]169; His discourse on the Mount of Olives, [260]169;
   anointment of, in Bethany, [261]171; His last passover, [262]175;
   indicates the traitor, [263]176, [264]178; His last supper, [265]177,
   etc.; discourse of, to the eleven, [266]178, etc.; in Gethsemane,
   [267]182; His arrest, [268]184; led away to Caiaphas, [269]186; accused
   of blasphemy, spit upon, and buffeted, [270]186; denied by Peter,
   [271]187, etc.; delivered to Pilate, [272]190; questioned by Pilate,
   [273]193; accused by the chief priests, [274]194; sent to Herod, who
   mocks Him, [275]194; crowned with thorns, [276]196; led away to be
   crucified, [277]197; crucified, [278]198; insults to, on the cross,
   [279]204; last words of, on the cross, and death of, [280]205; miracles
   at His death, [281]206; women looked on at His crucifixion, [282]207;
   body of, given to Joseph, [283]208; His burial, [284]208; resurrection
   of, announced by an angel to the women at the sepulchre, [285]209,
   etc.; appearance of, to Mary Magdalene, [286]213, etc.; manifests
   Himself to His disciples, [287]215, etc.; eats after His resurrection,
   [288]218, [289]224; ascension of, [290]220, [291]224; appearances of,
   in Galilee, [292]221, etc.; ten appearances of, [293]223.

   Christ, miracles of, at Cana, [294]121, [295]122; cure of multitudes,
   [296]121; healing the leper, [297]124, the centurion's servant,
   [298]126, Peter's wife's mother, [299]127; calming of the waters,
   [300]129; casting out the legion of devils, [301]130; healing the sick
   of the palsy, [302]130; raising of Jairus' daughter, [303]134; curing
   two blind men, [304]136, [305]158; restoring the withered hand,
   [306]140; the five loaves, [307]147; walking on the sea, [308]150;
   curing the woman of Canaan's daughter, [309]152; the seven loaves,
   [310]152; curing the lunatic, [311]155; making the fig-tree wither,
   [312]161, etc.; casting out an unclean spirit, [313]226; healing the
   infirm man at the pool of Siloam, [314]232.

   Church, the Catholic, testifies to the wisdom of Christ, [315]82.

   Cicero, speaks of the heathen gods as deified men, [316]90; his opinion
   of Roscius the actor, [317]99.

   Commandment, the great, [318]166.

   Crucifixion of Christ, [319]198.


   Devils are cast out when nations renounce their superstitions and
   believe on Christ, [320]168.

   Disciples, calling of the first, [321]121, etc.; the designation not
   confined to the twelve, [322]123.

   Divorce treated of, [323]156, etc.


   Elders, tradition of the, [324]151.

   Emmaus, the walk to, [325]215.

   Euhemerus declares the heathen gods to be only deified men, [326]90.

   Evangelists, their number, order, and the principles on which they
   wrote, [327]78; apocalyptic symbols of the, [328]80; variety yet
   harmony of the, [329]117, etc.


   Fasting, Christ's reply to questions about, [330]133.

   Forty, the, mentioned by Matthew, import of, [331]105.


   Genealogy of Christ, [332]102-107.

   Gods. See [333]Pagans.

   Gospels, authority of the, [334]77; Mark, Luke, and John compared with
   Matthew, [335]102-225; passages peculiar to Mark, Luke, or John,
   [336]226-236.


   Hebrews. See [337]Jews.

   Herod (the king), slaughter of the young children by, [338]112.

   Herod (the tetrarch), son of Herod the king, [339]114; his opinion of
   Christ, [340]145; compared to a fox, [341]168; mocks Christ, [342]194.


   Idolaters argued with, [343]94, etc.

   Idols, subverted by the name of Christ, [344]93; predicted rejection
   of, [345]94.

   Israel a witness for the true God, [346]94.


   Jairus, raising of his daughter, [347]134.

   Jesus. See [348]Christ.

   Jews, had only one God, the true God, [349]84; why subjected to the
   Romans, [350]85; still reject idolatry, [351]86.

   Jews, God of the, not worshipped by the Romans, [352]84; allowed the
   Jews to be conquered, but proved Himself to be unconquered, [353]85;
   proof that He is the true God, [354]87, etc.; exclusive worship due to
   the, [355]88; heathen opinions regarding, [356]89, [357]95; witnessed
   to by Israel, [358]94.

   John (the apostle), specially sets forth Christ's divinity, [359]79;
   his contemplative character, [360]80; passages peculiar to his Gospel,
   [361]231-236.

   John (the Baptist), his birth, [362]110.; his preaching, [363]112,
   [364]116; testimony of, [365]117; his knowledge of Christ, [366]120;
   his disciples and Christ, [367]132, [368]139; his imprisonment and
   death, [369]146.

   Joseph, why Christ's genealogy traced down to him and not to Mary,
   [370]102.

   Joseph of Arimathæa begs the body of Jesus, [371]208.

   Judas, was a thief, [372]174; covenants to betray Christ, [373]175;
   entry of Satan into, [374]178; his kiss, [375]184; his repentance,
   despair, and death, [376]191.

   Jupiter, thought by Varro to be the God of the Jews, [377]89; legends
   regarding, [378]89, etc.


   Leon, an Egyptian priest, expounded the origin of the gods, [379]90.

   Living creatures of the Apocalypse as symbols of the evangelists,
   [380]80.

   Lucan speaks of the God of the Jews as an uncertain God, [381]96.

   Luke, specially sets forth Christ's priesthood, [382]78; passages
   peculiar to his Gospel, [383]230, [384]231.


   Magic, books on, ascribed to Christ [385]83; arts of, ascribed to
   Christ, [386]84.

   Mark, follows Matthew closely, [387]78; passages peculiar to his
   Gospel, [388]226-230.

   Mary, the Virgin, song of, [389]110.

   Mary of Bethany anointed Christ, [390]173.

   Mary Magdalene, appearance of Christ to, [391]213.

   Matthew, wrote in Hebrew, [392]78; sets forth specially the kingly
   character of Christ, [393]79, [394]105; calling of, [395]131.

   Mediator, mystery of a, made known to the ancients, [396]100.

   Miracles accompanied Christ's death, [397]206. See [398]Christ.


   Nazareth, question regarding Christ's early residence in, [399]108.

   Nicodemus brings spices to anoint the body of Jesus, [400]208.

   Numbers (symbolic), [401]105, [402]106, [403]216.


   Pagans, the, their opinion of Christ, [404]82; derided their own
   deities, [405]83; while lauding Christ, insulted His disciples,
   [406]86; their fables about Jupiter and Saturn, [407]89; their gods
   only deified men, [408]90; dilemma for, [409]92.

   Parables, of the sower, etc., [410]143; of the labourers in the
   vineyard, [411]158, etc.; of the marriage feast, [412]165.

   Passion, the, strictly so called, [413]196; hour of, [414]198, etc.

   Passover, our Lord's last, [415]175.

   Peter, his denial of Christ foretold, [416]178; cuts off Malchus' right
   ear, [417]184; denies Christ, [418]187; his repentance, [419]189; his
   love to Christ, who commits His sheep to him, [420]235.

   Pharisees, the, object to Christ's eating with publicans and sinners,
   [421]132; seek a sign, [422]142; leaven of the, [423]153; sit in Moses'
   seat, [424]167.

   Pilate (Pontius), governor of the Jews, [425]113; Christ brought
   before, [426]190; questions Christ, [427]193; message from his wife,
   [428]200; seeks to release Christ, [429]200; gives Him up to be
   crucified, [430]201; gives His body to Joseph, [431]208.

   Plato quoted, [432]100.

   Potter's field, buying of the, [433]191; the words of the prophecy
   regarding, are as much Zechariah's as Jeremiah's, [434]191.

   Prophecy, against idols, [435]93; fulfilment of, [436]94; made known to
   the ancients the mystery of a Mediator, [437]100.

   Prophecy (heathen), defect of, [438]98.

   Pythagoras left no writings, [439]82.


   Robbers, the, crucified along with Christ, [440]204, etc.

   Romans (the heathen), worshipped the gods of all conquered nations,
   except the Jews, [441]84; their reasons for this exception, [442]87,
   etc.

   Romulus, fratricide of, [443]84.


   Saturn, asserted by some to be the God of the Jews, [444]84;
   interpretation of the name, [445]91.

   Scripture, deals with round numbers, omitting fractions, [446]198;
   often expresses the whole under the part, [447]211.

   Septuagint, the, its authority, [448]160.

   Sermon on the Mount, questions regarding its delivery, [449]124.

   Simon the Pharisee, supper in his house, [450]173.

   Simon the Cyrenian compelled to bear Christ's cross, [451]197.

   Socrates versified Æsop, but left no original writings, [452]82.

   Sonship, various orders of, [453]104.

   Staff, the, on the journey, [454]137.

   Supper, the Lords last, [455]177.


   Temple, the, buyers and sellers expelled from, [456]160; destruction
   of, foretold, [457]169; rending of the veil of, [458]206.

   Temptation of Christ, [459]120.

   Ten, the number symbolic of justice, [460]107.

   Thorns, the crown of, [461]196.

   Tradition of the elders, [462]151.

   Transfiguration of Christ, [463]154.

   Tribute, paying of, [464]155; to Cæsar, [465]166.


   Varro thought the God of the Jews was Jupiter, [466]89.

   Vinegar, the draught of, given to Christ on the cross, [467]205.

   Virgil cited, [468]89, [469]90, [470]91.


   Wise men, visit of the, [471]109, [472]111.

   Word, the, assumed the flesh, was not changed into the flesh, [473]79.


     __________________________________________________________________

  SERMONS ON SELECTED LESSONS OF THE GOSPELS.
     __________________________________________________________________


   Abraham, called only so, after change of name, because name related to
   earthly promises--not so name of Israel, [474]471; wondrous things
   promised to, and fulfilled, [475]500; and in us his seed, [476]500;
   believed without sight, [477]500.

   Absolution, analogy between, and loosing grave-clothes of Lazarus,
   [478]311, [479]415; Church has power of, [480]325, [481]326.

   Adoption, a sonship higher than that of nature, [482]255; frequently
   mentioned in Holy Scripture, [483]255, [484]256; the term of ancient
   use among the Jews, [485]256; "raising up seed to brother," [486]256;
   used by St. Paul to express the mystery of our adoption in Christ,
   [487]256.

   Adversary, to be agreed with and delivered from, [488]442; not so
   Satan, [489]442; the Law our, so long as we our own, [490]443; must
   agree with, by obedience, and so made no longer adversary, [491]443.

   Affliction, blessing to Christians, curse to the worldly as having no
   hope beyond world, [492]435.

   Africa, Church not confined to, [493]526 sq. See [494]Donatists.

   Ages, the six, of the world, [495]477.

   Alaric, [496]434.

   Alms, with Lord's Prayer a remedy against daily sins after Baptism,
   [497]277; not to be given of usury and oppressive gains, but of our
   righteous labours, [498]450; giving and forgiving make double,
   [499]287; good works without, will not avail in Day of Judgment,
   [500]293; value given to, in Day of Judgment, marvellous, [501]293;
   should be given freely, as being all of us of one family, [502]297,
   [503]298; blind Tobias guides his son to attain inward light by,
   [504]384; to be given first in deeds of mercy to our own souls,
   [505]435, [506]436.

   Analogies, earthly, partial from their very nature, [507]463; Holy
   Scripture justifies use of, in things relating to God, not to explain
   accurately, but to illustrate, [508]527.

   Angels, holy celibates lead life of, [509]505.

   Anger, the lust of vengeance, [510]286; if indulged in, becomes hatred
   and murder, [511]286, [512]357; great difference between, and hatred,
   [513]358; may have love in it, [514]357.

   Antichrist cometh in his own name, [515]497.

   Apostles, the "children" of the Jews who cast out devils, and are their
   judges, [516]318; witnesses of Christ, [517]318; reaped among the Jews,
   sowed among the Gentiles, [518]422; our Lord sowed and reaped in, as
   being in, [519]423; precepts given to, on receiving their commission,
   not to be understood carnally, [520]424; spiritual meaning of purse and
   shoes forbidden to, [521]424; of not saluting by the way enjoined on,
   [522]424, [523]425; saw The Head, and through Him believed The Body
   (the Church) not yet seen, [524]457; this the opposite to our state,
   [525]457; burning brands filled with fire from Holy Spirit, not to be
   put out by persecution, themselves set fire to world, [526]458; had
   need of pardon themselves, as sinners, [527]514; contention of, for
   pre-eminence, part of old leaven of law, [528]542.

   Apostolic See, two Councils on Pelagian heresy sent to, and rescripts
   sent back from, [529]504.

   Apsis, [530]335 (note).

   Arians, say Holy Ghost a creature, [531]320; errors of, carnal, from
   desire of seeing things, [532]460, from pride, [533]483; irreverence
   of, [534]512.

   Avarice. See [535]Covetousness.


   Babylon, carrying into, type of the passing of the Apostles to the
   Gentiles, [536]250.

   Banquets, of the world, for the weakness of our bodies, [537]346; of
   God, for the heart, not belly, [538]406.

   Baptism, the laver of regeneration, [539]277; especial time of
   solemnizing, last Sabbath in Lent (Easter Eve), [540]284; first gift of
   Spirit in, remission of sins, [541]324; all sin forgiven in, [542]278,
   [543]282, [544]286, [545]289, [546]417, [547]503; infirmity still
   remains after, [548]283, [549]503; the inward washing cleansing the
   soul through faith with alms, [550]435; the womb of the New Birth,
   [551]467; removes veil from Lord's Supper, [552]504; opens eyes of
   blind, [553]512; figured in the parable of the good Samaritan,
   [554]503; question whether he who hath sinned little or much, before,
   loves the more, [555]417; cleanses not through merits of minister, but
   by grace of Holy Spirit, [556]419, [557]420.

   Barley, figure of the Law, as opposed to wheat (the Gospel), [558]498.
   See [559]Wheat.

   Beatitudes, the: each duty in, has its own reward, [560]268; the
   members of the soul, which all together make it in proportion,
   [561]268.

   Bethesda, pool of, the Jews, five porches, the Law (five books of
   Moses), the troubling of, Christ's Passion, descending of one to,
   typical of unity, [562]475, [563]476, [564]477; going down to, of
   humility, [565]478.

   Beware, how awful a word from our Lord, [566]437.

   Birth, new, glory of, contrasted with misery of first, [567]469;
   natural, where different from, [568]470; where like that of Christ,
   [569]470.

   Bishop, origin of name of, [570]406; the master of a family its,
   [571]406.

   Blasphemy, unpardonable, refuge against, [572]331. See [573]Spirit,
   Holy.

   Blessed, the: commemoration of, [574]266; leads to thoughts of the
   course of blessedness, [575]266; a course of contest here, but reward
   hereafter, [576]266.

   Blessedness, to touch with heart The Blessed One, [577]459 sq.

   Blessings, temporal, to be sought with moderation, eternal, with
   longing and perseverance, [578]352.

   Blind, the two, by way side, figures of Jews and Gentiles, [579]382.

   Blindness, the punishment of those who turn from God, [580]460; they
   who fall under, often themselves insensible of, [581]460; to such
   coming of Light, greater darkness, [582]516; but not to those who know
   their darkness, [583]516; in the body, figurative of soul's, [584]515.

   Bodies, all, less in parts than in whole (as illustrating the Word),
   [585]459; even they not comprehended at once, much less God, [586]460.

   Body, the: soul acts through, [587]264; will be raised and reunited to
   the soul, [588]307; life which soul gives to, not its own, [589]307;
   everlasting death punishment of, [590]308; love will give pain to, to
   save, much more to soul, [591]378.

   Bread, the Word of God, our daily, [592]277, [593]282, [594]285,
   [595]289; comes to us here through means, in Heaven will come by sight,
   [596]282; in praying for, pray to be kept from evil, lest we lose it,
   [597]289; the "three loaves" of, given to friend, represent the Holy
   Trinity, [598]431.

   Burdens, all superfluities, [599]368.


   Cælestis, goddess at Carthage, [600]434 (and note).

   Captivity. See [601]Jews.

   Carthage, in possession of name of Christ, [602]434; council of,
   [603]504 (note).

   Catechumens hidden from mysteries of Eucharist, [604]504.

   Celibacy, the life of angels, [605]505; superiority of, as state of
   life, begins on earth life of heaven, [606]505.

   Centurion, humility and faith of, [607]298, [608]299; by which,
   received Christ into his heart, [609]298; office of, [610]299; the
   faith of the Gentiles figured in, [611]299, [612]382.

   Charity. See [613]Love.

   Chastisement, blessedness of, as from God, misery of absence of,
   [614]273, [615]274.

   Chastity, required of all, [616]505; preserved in women by many
   protections, in man by fear of God its chief protection in all,
   [617]505; stricter obligations to, of those under vows, [618]505; of
   married, unmarried, and widow, has in each its special reward,
   [619]505.

   Children, the portion of departed, to be sent to them through alms to
   Christ's poor, [620]371, [621]372; no plea for avarice, that it is
   providing for, [622]371, [623]396; God who created will provide for,
   better than he who begat, [624]397; though departed, not dead, but
   alive with Christ, [625]371, [626]372; our Lord in His poor to have
   portion of one child, [627]372.

   Christ, the Corner-stone, [628]259, [629]382, [630]391, [631]407;
   binding together circumcision and uncircumcision, [632]519; coeternal
   with the Everlasting God, [633]248; "the Bread of Life," [634]294,
   "which came down from Heaven," [635]499; in Heaven will be "directly"
   our Bread and Wisdom, [636]289; God and Man, [637]351, [638]355,
   [639]383, [640]401; as such known only to them that love God for
   Himself, [641]398; God-Man, and as such the Mediator, [642]355; ever in
   the world as God, He comes, goes, and returns as Man, [643]440; Son of
   Mary, as also of David, though God and Lord of both, [644]252; David's
   Son and David's Lord, [645]252, [646]397 sq., [647]401; how Son of
   David and of Abraham, [648]248; known as God by the penitent, not by
   the Pharisee, [649]418; by all seen as Man and Judge, as God by them
   that love Him, [650]490; as God fairer than man, as man more deformed,
   [651]407; with the form of a servant He laid down the way, with that of
   God prepared our home, [652]400; Incarnate, He took what He was not,
   lost not what He was, [653]401, [654]473; the merit of His human nature
   derived from its union with Him, [655]312; became man, and was born of
   a woman, in mercy to each sex, [656]246; His humanity our healing,
   [657]440, [658]483; His Divinity the Angels' joy, [659]483; we see Him
   as God by Him as Man, [660]473, [661]483; being the Way by which we go,
   [662]532, and so avoid snares, [663]532; His humility the medicine of
   our pride, [664]472, [665]475; in His "bodily" presence sent only to
   lost sheep of house of Israel, [666]342 sq.; the Stone against which
   Jews stumbled, which at His second coming will grind them to powder,
   [667]397, [668]401; healing the absent, He showed His future unseen
   power in the Gentile Church, [669]298, [670]299; heals now those who
   touch His hem in faith, not those who press Him outwardly, [671]299;
   our eyes opened through Him as He "passeth by" in Humanity, so as to
   see Him "stand still" in His unchangeable Divinity, [672]381, [673]382,
   [674]384; He "passed by" things here, that we might follow and be fed,
   [675]429; praying alone in the Mount, He typified His intercession for
   us, [676]337; walking on the sea, His power in the world in these
   latter days, [677]338; asleep in the ship, its mystical interpretation,
   [678]304; "went forth to hire labourers" in descent of Holy Ghost,
   [679]375 sq.; hid that He might suffer, [680]376, and redeem, [681]444;
   Head of Church, [682]400, [683]457, [684]496, [685]497, [686]517,
   [687]523; as such our Intercessor, [688]517; seen as such by Apostles,
   but we see the Body, [689]457; the Bridegroom as the Head, the Bride in
   the Body, [690]400; the Rock upon which He built His own Church,
   [691]383; the "mountain cast into the sea," i.e., the Gentiles,
   [692]389; receives, keeps, and will repay what is given to Him in His
   poor, [693]369; our Advocate, and the same, our Judge, [694]284; His
   Nativity impugned by cavilers because one generation reckoned twice,
   [695]249; His genealogy differently stated by St. Matthew and St. Luke,
   [696]256; solution of this (St. Matthew descends through Solomon, St.
   Luke ascends through Nathan), [697]257, [698]364; mystical meaning of
   this, [699]257, [700]364; mystical meaning of the number of the two
   genealogies, [701]257-259; His immaculate conception, [702]254,
   [703]255, necessity of faith in this to purify us, [704]315, [705]444,
   [706]536; His wonderful exchange with man, [707]351; rich as God, poor
   as man, [708]474; His Death our life, [709]499; by denying Incarnation,
   we deny His contest and victory, [710]412; His two comings foretold by
   Prophets, [711]400, [712]443; Jews hoped for His coming in a wrong
   manner, and so became His murderers, [713]400; His miracles on the
   body, types of mightier ones on our souls, [714]379, [715]413,
   [716]414, [717]415; Jews and Saul, though at first frenzied against
   Him, afterwards healed by, [718]378; His reality as shown in the words
   "It is I," [719]338, [720]339; self-seekers cannot follow, [721]420,
   [722]421; His prayers for His murderers not ineffectual, [723]351;
   lifted on the cross, He subdued souls to it, [724]246; came not down
   from it because He lay hid, [725]376; we must suffer as He suffered,
   that we may have fruit of His suffering, [726]303, [727]518; His
   sufferings being the earnest of our good things, [728]499; hearts which
   mourn for all sin bear His mark, [729]438; speaketh in the Law and
   Prophets, [730]349; power of man prevailed against Him only to the
   sepulchre, [731]444; all brethren in Him, [732]284 sq.; we are made
   Christians in hope of His coming, [733]440, and must follow whither He
   has gone, [734]409; not He, but the world faileth, [735]412; we must
   clothe His poor, that we may be clothed of Him, [736]408; His "least,"
   they who have left all for Him, [737]450; by bridling our desires, we
   cry to Him, [738]384; only true love of ourselves cometh through love
   of Him, [739]394; above in His Person, here in His members, [740]472,
   [741]517, and in the needy, [742]473; this double presence figured by
   angels ascending and descending, [743]399, [744]472, [745]473,
   [746]474; Passion of, typified by troubling of water of Bethesda,
   [747]475, [748]477; fulfilled law by giving charity, [749]481; will of,
   very righteousness, [750]482; manifests Himself to them that love Him,
   [751]485; His witness of Himself not true only to the hard of belief,
   [752]491; John Baptist and Martyrs witnesses of, [753]492; yea, Christ
   witness of Himself in them, [754]492; testified of in Old Testament,
   [755]497; His gifts not voided by man's unholiness, [756]498, [757]519;
   capable of mystical interpretation, [758]498 sq.; His Blood our price,
   [759]499; binds us by bonds of His Passion, [760]499; more to be loved
   than feared, [761]499; security in, as our great Patron, [762]500,
   [763]501; cannot deceive or be deceived, [764]507, [765]508; as the
   Fountain of all truth: and the Truth itself, [766]365, [767]508; went
   not up to Feast at first, to hide His Divinity, [768]509; ransomed us,
   by nature slaves and dead, [769]510; as under sin, [770]511; "free
   among the dead," i.e., sinless amongst sinners, [771]511; made sin for
   us, i.e., sacrifice for sin, [772]511; humiliation of, how typified by
   Elisha, [773]517; knoweth us better than we ourselves, [774]518; the
   Shepherd and the Door (entered by following Christ in pain), [775]518;
   Shepherd and Lamb, Pastor and Pasturage, Lion and Lamb, [776]523; He
   the only Son "by nature," [777]527, [778]530; the two Nativities of,
   each wondrous, [779]529; as man the Way, as God the Truth and Life,
   [780]532; they who possess, possess all things, [781]534, even the
   Father Himself, [782]534; came down in mercy, went up in righteousness,
   [783]536; very satisfaction of soul, [784]540. See [785]Word, The.

   Christians, must be taught first what to believe, then what to ask,
   [786]280; must turn all hindrances into their cross, [787]409,
   [788]410; dignity of, compared with unregenerate man, [789]500; are
   sons of God, [790]355; by grace, [791]527, [792]530; not mere men,
   [793]355; joined on to righteousness of Christ, [794]539; are vessels
   of Christ, cleansed by Him from bitterness and made sweet, [795]499
   sq.; not to be despised, [796]500; must love what is higher, not look
   back to what is lower, [797]411; are renewed by cleaving to Christ,
   [798]356; the true, hindered by the lukewarm from crying to Christ in
   deed, [799]383, [800]384, [801]385, [802]409; their duty to cry and not
   faint, [803]384 sq.; if they persevere, will be blessed by those who
   now hinder them, [804]385; as infants they look for the promises to
   come, [805]486; keep not Jewish festivals, as figured by our Lord's not
   going up to feast, [806]509.

   Church, the: the throne of God, [807]285; Christ's Body, [808]299,
   [809]302, [810]497, [811]517; seen by us who believe the Head,
   [812]457; testified of in Old Testament, [813]497; the Bride of Christ,
   [814]394, [815]400, [816]402 sq., [817]525, and one flesh with Him, and
   therefore speaketh to her children in His words, [818]496; our Mother,
   [819]281; the corner, as calling Jews from one side, and Gentiles from
   the other, [820]391; in intimate union with the Head, [821]399 sq.,
   [822]539; the raiment of Christ, illumined by Himself, The Sun,
   [823]347; the ship tossed on the sea, [824]304, [825]337; founded on
   faith, [826]247; how faith is grafted in, [827]383 sq.; is Christ as
   shown by Christ's words to St. Paul at his conversion, [828]509; held
   together by unity, [829]517; this unity shown in the gift of tongues,
   [830]376, and figured in the one seed of Abraham, [831]539; charity the
   health of, [832]517; in St. Peter formed singly, [833]518; prays for
   evil as for Saul, [834]275; comprehends all ranks and classes,
   [835]247, the weak and strong, [836]341, the good and evil, [837]334;
   wicked clerics exist in, [838]520; built in the blood of Martyrs,
   [839]458; our Lord and the Martyrs the spectacles of, [840]245; the
   cavils of heretics work the development of the mysteries of the faith
   of, [841]249; the spiritual in, heaven, the carnal, earth, [842]276;
   which latter, as the crowd our Blessed Lord, press the truth, the
   former touch it, [843]299, [844]300, [845]301, [846]302; sins not
   forgiven out of, [847]328, [848]329, [849]331; forgiven in it by Holy
   Spirit, [850]330, [851]331; they who separate from, have not Holy
   Spirit, [852]328, [853]329 sq.; sacraments without, have "form" but not
   "power of godliness," [854]329; penitence sure of forgiveness in,
   [855]331; St. Peter walking on sea, a type of it when in danger from
   man's praise, [856]339; Christ's ascending, the dedication of the
   foundation of, [857]438; the inn of the good Samaritan, [858]503;
   loveth Christ for His own sake, [859]524 sq.; like in spirit to St.
   Mary in body, at once Virgin and Mother, [860]526; different gifts to
   different members of, [861]535; toucheth Christ ascended through faith,
   [862]537.

   Circumcelliones, [863]303, [864]438.

   Clerics, evil, represented by Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses'
   seat, [865]519; our Lord's words about these latter perverted by,
   [866]520; existence of, in Church, [867]520.

   Coeval, in temporal things analogous to coeternal, [868]461; substance
   and image coeval, instances of, [869]463.

   Competentes, who they were, 241, [870]274.

   Comprehension, faith, adoration, and growth, successive steps to,
   [871]488.

   Confession, of sin, is praise of God by the sinner or the godly,
   [872]311; analogy between, and raising of Lazarus, [873]311; beating of
   breast with, [874]310; protects against spiritual enemies, [875]311; of
   the penitent thief, [876]312.

   Constantinople, [877]434.

   Couch, sick man carrying his, typifies mastering the pleasures of the
   flesh, [878]481.

   Covetous, he is, whom God sufficeth not, [879]438.

   Covetousness, deceits of, [880]348; bids us consult for a future which
   is not, [881]371; Christ overthrows by bidding us consult for "another"
   future, [882]371; the pleas for, as on behalf of children, inexcusable,
   [883]371, [884]372; consists in a greedy seeking of our own, [885]437;
   fair pleas of the man in the Gospel who was warned against it, [886]436
   sq.; thoughts of Christ's poverty for us, cure of, [887]439; of many
   kinds, [888]438, but all must be shunned, [889]438, even that of life,
   [890]440.

   Creator, nativity of, not to be judged by that of creature, [891]461.

   Creature, good in, image of God, [892]463; imperfect and sin in, its
   own, [893]463 sq.

   Creed, taught before Lord's Prayer, [894]274, [895]280, [896]284,
   [897]288; our mirror, to be repeated morning and evening: the rule of
   faith, [898]288; repeated by those to be baptized on Easter eve,
   [899]284 (note), [900]288.

   Cross, the: the brightest jewel in the diadem of kings, [901]246; our
   deliverance from the tempests of the world, [902]337; what it is to
   take up, [903]409, [904]410; each as he has attained, takes up,
   [905]411; the honour afterwards paid to, [906]381; interpretation of
   the parts of, [907]370 sq.; signed on our foreheads in baptism,
   [908]337.

   Crown of righteousness, God's free gift, out of mercy and pity,
   [909]503.

   Cyprian, St., good shepherd, [910]523.


   Darkness, he who thinks himself in, is enlightened, [911]313.

   Day, The Last: unknown to angels, but known to Son in the Father,
   [912]411; kept in store for Devil at end, [913]412; must watch in good
   lives that we be not unprepared for, [914]412; to each individual, as
   the day of his death, [915]411.

   Dead, the: wherefore said to sleep, [916]403; the raising of the dead
   in heart a greater miracle than of the dead in body, but seen only by
   those themselves raised in heart, [917]413; the Three, raised by our
   Lord, types of Divine Truth, [918]413, [919]414; they who are required
   to bury the dead, unbelievers, [920]421.

   Death, certainty of, from our birth, [921]346; Christ by His death
   destroyed, [922]355; our subjection to, teaches humility, [923]412; all
   good and evil uncertain except, [924]412; what death good, and what
   evil, discerned not by eyes, but by Christ in heart, [925]426; an evil,
   avoided by living well, [926]426 sq.; soul can and cannot undergo,
   [927]307; how that of soul and body, each known, [928]308; everlasting
   punishment that of body, absence of God that of soul, [929]308;
   incipient desire, consent, act, habit, four degrees of spiritual,
   [930]415; none of these beyond repentance, [931]415, [932]416.

   Debtor, God longs to be our, [933]414; all are God's, [934]362 sq., and
   all have brethren, theirs, [935]362 sq.

   Debts. See [936]Forgiveness, [937]Sins.

   Decalogue, the, reference of "ten thousand talents" to, [938]364.

   Deceit, to be avoided, [939]442; instances of, [940]442.

   Delay, only practised by him who thinks he has longer to live,
   [941]361; peril of, in good, [942]362.

   Denarius, the: the reward of righteousness, [943]480.

   Despair, the death of soul, [944]376; whilst life lasts, to be
   entertained of no one, [945]325.

   Devil, the: subdued by praise of God, [946]312; accuser of the saints,
   [947]398; corrupter of Church's virginity, [948]402; the wolf of the
   Church, [949]531; as invisible, must be subdued by invisible means: our
   self-praise makes victorious, [950]312.

   Disciples, doubt of, represents after errors of heretics, [951]338,
   [952]339; unbelief of, reproved by our Lord, [953]349; incredulity of,
   concerning Christ's resurrection, [954]379; Christ preserved His scars
   to heal wounds in hearts of, [955]304, [956]448.

   Discipline, not to be omitted, [957]357; though severe, tenderness when
   needed, [958]365.

   Dogs, heathen called, by Canaanitish woman, [959]469.

   Donatists, [960]304, [961]319, [962]386, [963]449 (notes); false
   assertion of, concerning diminution of righteous, [964]386; false
   accusations made by, [965]388 (note); received Maximianists whom they
   had formerly condemned, [966]388; made efficacy of sacraments to depend
   upon holiness of minister, [967]418 (note), [968]497, [969]498,
   [970]525, and therefore Antichrists as looking to themselves for
   Christ's gifts, [971]497 sq., and claiming them as their own, [972]523;
   folly and inconsistency of, in their separation, [973]418 (note);
   conduct of Pharisee more enlightened than theirs, [974]418; pride of,
   [975]498, [976]521; in disbelieving Church, disbelieve Christ,
   [977]498; despise Him, like Jews, [978]498; "go up" by another way,
   [979]521; pervert Scripture (their perversions refuted), [980]526 sq.

   Doves, how to be imitated, [981]306; even strife of, peaceful,
   [982]306.

   Duties, "salute not by the way" teaches earnestness in fulfilling,
   [983]425; those present to us, our test, [984]514.


   Egypt, glory of Church in, [985]526.

   Elect, the: chosen according to grace, [986]421; owe all to grace,
   [987]421 sq.; chosen by Christ as He made them, not as He found them,
   [988]410; why the poor and ignorant, not the great, first chosen,
   [989]377.

   Eleven, mystical meaning of, [990]258 sq., [991]364 sq.

   Elisha, in recovering the dead child, a type of our Lord's humiliation,
   [992]517.

   Enemies, in destroying our body only release soul, [993]307; by not
   loving them, hurt ourselves more than they us, [994]278 sq.; love of,
   commended, [995]278, [996]280, [997]396, by St. Stephen's example,
   [998]396; attained by few, but still by all to be prayed for, and
   sought in action, [999]279; sin of, only to be hated, [1000]278 sq.,
   and its destruction to be prayed for, not theirs, [1001]395, [1002]396;
   all have, [1003]278; are our brethren, [1004]278; have no power against
   faithful except so far as to try and prove them, [1005]303.

   Equality, perfect likeness in every way, [1006]463.

   Eucharist, The: our daily bread, [1007]277, [1008]282, [1009]285,
   [1010]289; received by both good and bad, [1011]277, [1012]392,
   [1013]408; received by the faithful, [1014]277, [1015]285, [1016]394;
   the Body of Christ received by disciples from His Hands, The Same
   received by us through faith, [1017]448; the virtue of it, unity, that
   we may become what we receive, [1018]282; reserve of ancient Church in
   speaking of, [1019]277 (note), [1020]392; hypocrites, as Judas, eat to
   damnation, [1021]323, [1022]448; sin separates from, [1023]285,
   [1024]289; Christ by seeming to "go further" teaches us to hold Him
   fast in, [1025]391 sq.; important for each to see how approaches,
   [1026]391 sq.; all who come to, must have love, [1027]394; Body and
   Blood received in, our meat and drink, and saying hard to the hard, but
   not to faith, [1028]501; in it we eat and drink life, [1029]501; never
   faileth, [1030]501; faith in, gift of God, who draws us by love,
   [1031]501; to be received with thought, [1032]504; Catechumens hide
   themselves from, [1033]504; hidden from them by veil, which Baptism
   removes, [1034]504; care necessary in preparing faithful for,
   [1035]505; chastity required in recipients of, [1036]505 sq.; believing
   Jews received very Blood which they had shed, [1037]343, [1038]351,
   [1039]378, [1040]388.

   Eunomians confess not Trinity properly, [1041]320.

   Eunuch, the: to whom St. Philip preached, received the Holy Spirit
   without confirmation, [1042]419; that God's power might not seem
   limited to man's ministry, [1043]419.

   Evil, abounds because we are evil, [1044]352; disposed by God for good,
   [1045]478; this disposal illustrated by things on earth, [1046]478.

   Eye, the: cannot comprehend God, [1047]459; that of mind may reach to
   Him, [1048]459.


   Faith, the gift of God, [1049]431, [1050]502; denied to proud,
   [1051]312, [1052]313; a garment and breastplate, [1053]288; like grain
   of mustard seed, small but intense, [1054]346; apt to waver because God
   does not give at once, [1055]411; strengthened by prayer, [1056]454,
   although itself fountain of prayer, [1057]454; figured in the "fish,"
   [1058]432; to be genuine, must contain both hope and love, [1059]269,
   [1060]538; worketh by love, and thus distinguished from faith of devils
   and of the wicked, [1061]269, [1062]323, [1063]395; believes Christ
   unseen, through Holy Ghost, [1064]536; leads on to perfect vision of
   Christ, [1065]400, and purifies heart to see God, [1066]269, [1067]380;
   well to know our deficiency in, and where to ask, [1068]349; so far as
   gives way, temptation advances: greatness of, if perfect, [1069]454;
   waking typified by Christ awake, sleeping by Christ asleep, [1070]356;
   simple, therefore in difficulties sees mysteries, [1071]247; precedes
   understanding, [1072]465, [1073]481, [1074]535; that by which we abide
   in unseen truths, [1075]467, [1076]481 sq., and believe them, though
   not seeing, [1077]486; the step of the understanding, [1078]481; with
   obedience, resurrection of soul, [1079]489; want of, spoken of as only
   sin, as retaining all others, [1080]536, [1081]538; casteth out Satan,
   [1082]537 sq.; "the Catholic," gathered by witness of Scripture, and
   grounded on Apostolic truth, [1083]259; first founded on visible
   miracles, but now more blessed without them, [1084]379; The Creed, rule
   of, [1085]288.

   Families, heads of, as bishops in, [1086]406.

   Fear, and sorrow, alternate tormentors of soul, [1087]474; of God,
   excludes all other fears, [1088]306, [1089]307.

   Feasts, two: one here, other hereafter, [1090]392, [1091]394; He that
   invites us all, will separate unworthy from it, [1092]406.

   Fideles, [1093]277 (note).

   Fifty, the number of the reward, i.e., the denarius added to the
   accomplishment of righteousness, [1094]480.

   Fig tree, the barren in parable, the human race under sin, [1095]443
   sq.; miracle on, out of season, shows peril of not having fruit when
   Christ seeks, [1096]389, [1097]390; seeking fruit on, out of season,
   explained, [1098]390; the reprobate of the Jews who believed not,
   [1099]389; withered, when Apostles turned to Gentiles, [1100]389;
   figure of those who talk but do not act, [1101]344; in the vineyard,
   [1102]332, [1103]443, [1104]444.

   Fire and light, instance of coeval generation, [1105]462, [1106]464.

   Flesh, the: like a current, [1107]466; must be fought against and
   subdued, [1108]492; the Spirit bears witness against, [1109]493; this
   Spirit, that of God within us fighting against ourselves, [1110]494;
   not to be gratified on plea of necessity, [1111]493; lusteth against
   spirit, only where spirit is, i.e., in good, [1112]493; this lusting
   consequence of our loss of integrity through fall, [1113]493; no peace
   from, but by victory over, [1114]494; overcome by resistance,
   [1115]495; quelled by ineffectual risings, [1116]495; lusts of, done in
   us, but not fulfilled except by us, [1117]495.

   Food, earthly, diminishes as fed on, not so heavenly, [1118]488; must
   prepare heart for latter, as stomach for former, [1119]488.

   Forgiveness, our covenant with God, [1120]278, [1121]286; may exist
   with proper discipline, [1122]279, [1123]365; to be practised by those
   about to be baptized, [1124]278, [1125]282, [1126]286; enforced by
   example of Christ, [1127]279, [1128]286, [1129]453, at least towards
   penitent, [1130]279, [1131]452, and of St. Stephen, [1132]279; withheld
   from him who withholds, [1133]279 sq., [1134]283, [1135]289, [1136]365,
   [1137]453 sq.; who thus lies to God, [1138]453; inculcated especially,
   because if lost, all lost, [1139]284; no despair of, [1140]343; no
   limit to God's, of us, so should be none to our forgiving of others,
   [1141]368; number of generations to Christ, mentioned by St. Luke,
   typify complete, [1142]259, [1143]364; duty of constant, taught in
   "seven times a day," [1144]452; Easter, a special season of, [1145]286.

   Forty, [1146]257 sq.; the number figures the accomplishment of
   righteousness, [1147]478, [1148]479, as shown by forty days' fast of
   our Lord, and Moses, and Elias, [1149]480; therefore Law, Prophets, and
   Gospel one, [1150]480.

   Friend, only to be so esteemed as long as he persuades not to evil,
   [1151]354; has much influence for good or evil, [1152]377; the "friend
   from the way," man as a pilgrim or penitent, [1153]431.

   Funerals, abuses at, [1154]370 (note).


   Generation, instances of coeval, [1155]462, [1156]463, [1157]465 sq.

   Gentiles, believed not seeing, according to prophecy, [1158]344; have
   therefore greater praise than Jews, [1159]344; why called "dogs,"
   [1160]345; the "wild olive tree," [1161]346; grafted in through
   humility, the natural branches being cut off through pride, [1162]347.

   Gideon, fleece of, how concerned with type of grace, [1163]504.

   God. Compare [1164]Christ, [1165]Son, [1166]Word, [1167]Holy Spirit.
   Our Father, [1168]275, [1169]280 sq., [1170]284 sq., [1171]288 sq.,
   [1172]295, [1173]543, and yet Himself our inheritance, [1174]543; alone
   good, [1175]392, and in Himself Goodness, alone makes us good,
   [1176]294, [1177]295; our Refuge in all things, and by all things,
   [1178]274; the Fountain of Justice, [1179]450; unspeakable, [1180]460;
   present everywhere, [1181]316, and not to be escaped from, [1182]316,
   [1183]533; we must escape to, [1184]316, and at all times, [1185]505,
   [1186]533; Omniscient, [1187]316; Incomprehensible, [1188]262,
   [1189]263, [1190]265 sq.; the Bread, the Shepherd, [1191]431; not
   contained in space as material bodies, [1192]262, [1193]269, nor to be
   comprehended therefore by eye, [1194]459 sq.; known from His works,
   [1195]314, which He still upholdeth, [1196]478; through Him only we
   follow Saints, [1197]420; feedeth all, yet suffereth no diminution,
   [1198]488, and alone sufficeth us, [1199]481; the fulness of those who
   hunger and thirst after righteousness, [1200]266, [1201]296; Giver of
   "daily bread" to all, [1202]276, [1203]277, but of special bread to the
   children, [1204]277; delays to give, that we may long the more,
   [1205]296; we all His beggars, [1206]276, [1207]296, [1208]363,
   [1209]453; and to receive of Him must ourselves give to others,
   [1210]296; the Life of soul, [1211]299; loss of, death, [1212]299; the
   Light of the heart, [1213]488; giveth pain that He may heal, [1214]343;
   chose weak and ignorant, that we might trust in Him, and not in the
   great, [1215]377; chooses according both to His own Grace and man's
   righteousness, [1216]421; alone forgiveth sin, [1217]418; cultivateth
   us to make us better, [1218]373, [1219]374, [1220]452; can subdue our
   passions, as we who are His image the beasts, [1221]273; fear of,
   preservative against fear of man, [1222]306, and brings us to Him, that
   He may subdue us to Himself, [1223]273; who turneth man's wrongs to our
   good, [1224]303; to be sought in prayer, though He knoweth our wants,
   [1225]349 sq.; Himself our reward in Glory, [1226]348, for to see Him
   the great blessing of the Resurrection, [1227]490, and Life Eternal,
   [1228]490; to see, i.e., Him who seeth, [1229]315; sight of, the gift
   of the pure, [1230]267, [1231]268, for to inward eye until healed by
   God, this sight painful, [1232]380 sq., as to Adam after fall,
   [1233]380 sq.; the end of all of our desires here, [1234]315 sq.;
   corporeal parts ascribed to, in Holy Scripture not to be understood
   literally, [1235]267 sq.; things of, understood through likenesses,
   [1236]262 sq.; to be loved for Himself, [1237]398, [1238]400,
   [1239]520; love of, maketh soul chaste, [1240]532; He being the Lawful
   Husband of the soul, [1241]520; we should forget ourselves in love of,
   [1242]533; praying for Name, Kingdom, and Will of, we pray for
   ourselves, [1243]275, [1244]276, [1245]281, [1246]285, [1247]289; we
   can add nothing to: our union with, makes us what we were not,
   [1248]460; Son, Image of, [1249]462; rest of, from creation, no sign of
   weariness, but type of our rest, [1250]477; Maker of good, and Disposer
   of evil, [1251]478; word of, preached by wicked preachers, like vine
   among thorns, [1252]521 sq.; seen by philosophers at a distance,
   [1253]531; they that serve, have all things, [1254]534; the Simple and
   Singular Good, [1255]532.

   Good, "that which we cannot lose against our will," [1256]333; two
   kinds of, [1257]295; things that are, witnesses against us if ourselves
   evil, [1258]333, [1259]367, [1260]438.

   Good, the: mingled with wicked in Church, and their part with, therein,
   what it is, [1261]385, [1262]386; we made good, only by Him who is ever
   Good, [1263]294, [1264]295; in what sense all are good, as well as
   evil, [1265]392.

   Gospel, the: the voice of Christ, [1266]366; seemingly a call to labour
   and not to rest, [1267]317; general reception of, [1268]246 sq.,
   [1269]376; to be preached by love, not "by occasion," [1270]425; to be
   received for Itself, without regard to preacher in himself, [1271]425,
   and to be preached though not received, [1272]425; difficulties in,
   [1273]247; spiritual meaning of narratives of, [1274]344.

   Goths, the, [1275]434.

   Grace, man righteous only by, [1276]444, [1277]542; makes us hope
   through trust in God, [1278]281, [1279]477, [1280]540; enables to
   fulfil Law, [1281]476; weakness of Law without, [1282]516; present
   manifestation of, makes Pelagians worse than Jews, [1283]504; hidden in
   clouds in Old Testament, [1284]504; in New Testament given to all (the
   wet floor) except Jews (the dry fleece): often spoken of in Holy
   Scripture, [1285]504; devils cast out through, [1286]318.


   Happiness, requires great virtue to struggle with, [1287]342; itself
   happiness not to be overcome by, [1288]342; the bitterness mingled
   with, that we may seek that to come, [1289]432 sq.

   Harvest, two kinds of, one among Jews, the other amongst Gentiles,
   [1290]422; we must sow, that we may reap what we see not, [1291]427.

   Hatred, inveterate anger, [1292]286 sq.; the beam in the eye to be cast
   out, [1293]357; itself darkness, and unable to correct aright,
   [1294]358; hurts him who entertains it more than others, [1295]358.

   Health, of the body, endures not, [1296]474; typical of health of soul,
   [1297]474.

   Hearing, danger of being pleased with, without doing, [1298]362.

   Heart, the: produces thorns or good fruit according to what is planted,
   [1299]398 sq.; must be prepared as "good ground" for seed of Gospel,
   [1300]423; where it has been, we shall go, [1301]369; by what cleansed,
   [1302]398; eye of, must be healed to see God, [1303]380, which the end
   of the sacraments and all gifts of Church, [1304]380; this hindered by
   evil passions and habits, [1305]380 sq.; eye of, unless healed, would
   be pained by sight of God, [1306]380 sq.; "Lift up the heart" addressed
   to communicants only, [1307]368 (note); this address not in vain to the
   Saints on earth, [1308]270, [1309]434.

   Heathen, the: how Christians retard conversion of, [1310]301; how to be
   gained over, [1311]302; to be persuaded by individuals, not forced,
   [1312]304; the tribulations of Christians an offence to, [1313]355 sq.;
   complain against Christians because of destruction of Rome, [1314]356
   sq.; he who injures, and rejecteth admonition, to be accounted an
   heathen, yet to be cared for, [1315]359.

   Heathenism, rise and fall of cities not dependent upon, [1316]434.

   Heaven, the mind, as earth the flesh, [1317]276, [1318]281, [1319]285,
   [1320]289; the Church, as earth its enemies, [1321]276, [1322]281,
   [1323]285; the spiritual, as earth the carnal, [1324]276, [1325]281
   sq., [1326]285; saints dwelling in, in heart, called so, [1327]270; no
   carnal pleasures to be expected in, [1328]346; One only ascended to,
   because Saints one body with Him, [1329]399 sq.; way to, rough, but
   made smoother by Christ, [1330]409; the first step to, humility,
   [1331]409.

   Hebrew language, affinity between, and Punic, [1332]450.

   Hell, trembling at the resurrection of the just, [1333]415.

   Heretics, appeal to Holy Scripture against Church, [1334]247; suffered
   penalty of law for impiety and deeds of violence, [1335]304 (and note);
   to be persuaded by individuals, not forced, [1336]304; though gathered
   together under outward profession of Christ's Name, not of His Kingdom,
   because divided against themselves, [1337]316; cavils of, cause of
   development of mysteries in Church, [1338]249; not rebaptized,
   [1339]329; mercy in concealing, perverted, [1340]504; lay claim to
   martyrdom, [1341]523; why without real claim to it, [1342]523; to be
   prayed for, [1343]528; feed their own, not Christ's, [1344]544.

   Hireling, he who works for reward, [1345]519; preaches not chastely,
   [1346]521; such many in number, [1347]521; reproves not bad, if rich,
   [1348]521; "fleeth" in soul, though not in body, [1349]521, [1350]522.

   Hope, the "Egg," fostered by love, destroyed by looking back, [1351]432
   sq.; the gift of God, [1352]432; that, perverse, which delayeth
   repentance, [1353]376, [1354]377.

   Hospitality commended, [1355]357, [1356]446.

   Humility, the foundation of the spiritual edifice, [1357]315,
   [1358]316, [1359]346 sq.; Baptism of Christ an example of, [1360]259;
   Christ Master and Author of, [1361]251, [1362]298, [1363]345; the first
   step to Heaven, [1364]409, and road to Eternity, [1365]473; necessity
   of continuing in, [1366]502; because our abundance of God, [1367]498
   sq., [1368]502 sq.; receiveth grace, like valleys the rain, [1369]501,
   [1370]502; figured in Gideon's basin, [1371]504; the highest of all
   gifts and given to all, [1372]534, [1373]535; the foundation of love,
   [1374]535; the way by which we follow our Lord, [1375]535 sq.; the way
   to perfection, [1376]536.

   Hundred, mystical meaning of the number, [1377]364.


   Idols, not to be broken down, unless by proper authority, [1378]303,
   [1379]304; destruction of, not cause of destruction of Rome, [1380]434
   sq.; feasts in temples of, altogether forbidden, [1381]300; these lead
   to denial of Christ's Divinity, [1382]301; vain excuses for such
   conduct, [1383]301 sq.

   Ignorance, some, better than presumptuous knowledge, [1384]459;
   confession of, better than rash interpretation of Holy Scripture,
   [1385]508.

   Immortality, true, an entire unchangeableness, [1386]307; our true
   health, [1387]346.

   Impenitence, final, the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost,
   [1388]325, [1389]330, [1390]331; precludes forgiveness of all other
   sins, [1391]326, and how, [1392]326.

   Inheritance, God ours, we His, [1393]452; difference between heavenly
   and earthly, [1394]543.

   Injury, the duty of him who commits and of him who sustains, [1395]359;
   latter worse of two if he strive not to win his brother, [1396]359; if
   done in sight of others, sin against them also, [1397]360.

   Israel, all that took place amongst people of, figurative, [1398]250.


   Jacob, correspondence between, and Nathanael, [1399]391; dream of,
   recorded, because of its mystical meaning, [1400]470 sq.; the stone to
   which the angels descended, Christ, [1401]361, [1402]471, therefore
   anointed, [1403]391, [1404]471; on the ground, i.e., became man, and so
   an offence to Jews, [1405]471; meaning of name of, [1406]471; change of
   name of, to Israel, [1407]471; angel with whom he wrestled, Christ, who
   was overcome "willingly"--mystical interpretation of this, [1408]471;
   the Church Jacob here, Israel hereafter, [1409]472; angels ascending
   and descending to, Christ's twofold presence in the Church and in
   heaven, [1410]472, [1411]473 sq.

   Jairus, raising of daughter of, applied to gradations of sin,
   [1412]495.

   Jechonias, reckoned twice in genealogy of Christ, [1413]250; a type of
   Christ, [1414]250 sq.; centre of two dispensations, [1415]251; type of
   the Corner-stone, [1416]251.

   Jesus, "a Saviour," [1417]249.

   Jews, still hope for Christ's coming, [1418]397, [1419]400; destroyed
   their Physician, [1420]350 sq.; wilfully blind to Holy Scripture,
   [1421]397; carnal in understanding, [1422]477; haters of truth,
   [1423]496; lost through pride in what God had done for them, [1424]345;
   would establish their own righteousness, [1425]503; converted by St.
   Peter, [1426]343; "lost sheep," to whom Christ was sent, [1427]343; in
   what sense they contracted sin, by Christ's coming, [1428]321 sq.; why
   "children of the Kingdom," [1429]300; Prophets sowed amongst, Apostles
   reaped, [1430]422; mercies vouchsafed to, though sinful, [1431]443;
   refusing the Supper, by killing Christ prepared It for us, [1432]447;
   signified by "His Own," [1433]469; stumble at Christ, the stone on the
   ground, [1434]471; the pool of Bethesda, [1435]475 sq.; "troubled" by
   our Lord's Passion, [1436]477; believe not, because they "saw" not
   Christ to be God, [1437]477; figured as to their loss of Grace by
   Gideon's dry fleece, [1438]504.

   Job, trial of, proved he loved God for His own sake, [1439]398; the Law
   not written on tables, but in hearts of godly, in age of, [1440]353.

   John, St., opening of Gospel of, understood only in ineffable manner,
   not by words of man, [1441]459; Divinity of Gospel of, [1442]466;
   uncarnalizing and refining, [1443]530; drank in the truth from Lord's
   Breast, [1444]466, [1445]467, [1446]508 sq.

   John the Baptist, testimony of, concerning Christ, [1447]309,
   [1448]313, [1449]492, and Christ's concerning him, [1450]309; greatness
   and humility of, [1451]309; Christ greater than, [1452]309, [1453]492,
   and angels, [1454]309; question of, concerning Christ through his
   disciples did not imply doubt, [1455]309 sq., but they were sent to Him
   that John's testimony might be confirmed, [1456]310; taken for Christ,
   [1457]313; not "The Light," but a lamp, [1458]313.

   Joseph, St., justice of, shown in purity and tenderness, [1459]248; our
   Lord subject to, as His father, [1460]252, being at same time His
   creature, [1461]252; in what sense our Lord's father, [1462]251,
   [1463]255, [1464]256; teaches us to rebuke secret sins against us
   secretly, [1465]360 sq.

   Judas, betrayal of, of Christ, world saved through, God using designs
   of its evil, [1466]249; ate the Body and Blood to damnation, [1467]323.

   Judgment, Day of, [1468]293; good works without purity of no avail at,
   [1469]293; value then to be given to alms an amazement to us,
   [1470]293, [1471]294; "midnight" signifies secrecy of, [1472]403;
   groundless calculation concerning period of, [1473]403; even good
   consciences tremble at, [1474]404; gate of repentance will be shut at,
   [1475]405; completion of former prophecies pledge of completion of
   those about this, [1476]445.


   Kingdom of God, promised if certain conditions fulfilled, [1477]445; as
   prayed for in Lord's Prayer, not yet come, [1478]276, [1479]281,
   [1480]285, [1481]289; will come to us if we are His, and good,
   [1482]276, [1483]281, [1484]285, [1485]289; will come when resurrection
   of dead shall have taken place, [1486]281; not diminished by increasing
   number of those who possess, because not divided, [1487]385; men try to
   divide this heritage through the Blood of Christ, [1488]319.


   Labour, man's: arises from his mortality, [1489]315; all in, through
   sin, therefore invitation of Christ to rest addressed to all,
   [1490]385.

   Labourers, hired into vineyard at different hours, represent Patriarchs
   and Prophets called early, and Christians at the last, [1491]374 sq.,
   or persons made Christians at different periods of their lives,
   [1492]375; all came when called, [1493]375; had they delayed, no future
   call promised, [1494]375.

   Law, eternal, in the heart, [1495]353.

   Law, the: given to discover sin, not to cure it, [1496]476, [1497]542;
   Grace only enables to fulfil, [1498]476; without Grace makes more
   guilty, because not kept, [1499]516; he fulfils who abstains from
   world, [1500]479; Prophets and Gospel one with, proved by the fasts of
   Moses, Elias, and our Blessed Lord, [1501]480; ten strings of (Ps.
   cxliv. 9), ten precepts of, figured in the staff sent from Elisha by
   Gehazi's hands, [1502]517; causes fear by reason of trust in self,
   [1503]540; in this opposed to Grace, [1504]540; those under, led
   captive, [1505]542.

   Lazarus, buried, figure of those buried in habits of sin, raised, of
   those raised from sin by cry of Christ, [1506]414, [1507]415; sin
   entangles, confession frees, example in, [1508]311.

   Lie, slays soul, [1509]308, [1510]355; all saying what is not done, not
   a, [1511]506; difference between being deceived and telling a,
   [1512]507, because we may be deceived and yet not lie, [1513]507, as
   saying what we "think" to be true, and so not erring in will,
   [1514]507.

   Life, brief, [1515]440, [1516]441; one of toil, [1517]290; one long
   sickness, [1518]346, [1519]351; one long death, [1520]346; not to be
   coveted, lest it bring death, [1521]439; exposed to storms and
   calamities, [1522]337; a struggle, [1523]492, [1524]494; a war, must
   hope for triumph till the end, [1525]494; a long, long torture,
   [1526]366; long, should be good also, [1527]362; good, and "good days,"
   where to be sought and where not, [1528]440, [1529]441 sq.; reckoned
   among things superfluous by Martyrs, [1530]302, [1531]303; to be
   amended immediately because of uncertainty of morrow, [1532]361; years
   of, decrease, not increase, [1533]366, [1534]443; all wish for long and
   prosperous, Scripture only teaches where to find such, [1535]441;
   though full of evil, no man willing to end it, [1536]366, yet he who
   lives long is only running to the end, [1537]440 sq.; true, to rise and
   reign with Christ, [1538]366; men wish for everything good but good
   life, [1539]362; man's love of, should teach love of the True Life,
   [1540]365 sq., [1541]487, should be one end of, [1542]427; they who
   live in, after manner of men, called men after God, "gods," [1543]411.

   Life eternal, the reward of labour, [1544]303, [1545]366; the denarius
   given to labourers in vineyard, [1546]375; given alike to all the good,
   [1547]375, but has different degrees of Glory, [1548]375; to be in some
   degree estimated by this life without its evils, the price of,
   ourselves, [1549]487; not to be explained in words, [1550]488; the Life
   of, Christ's, [1551]489; to see God is, [1552]490.

   Light, extinguished by pride, [1553]313; who thinks himself light,
   darkness, [1554]313.

   Loaves, the "three," asked for by the "friend," signify the Holy
   Trinity, [1555]431; also Faith, Hope, and Charity, [1556]431,
   [1557]432; mystery of feeding "four thousand" with "seven," [1558]406.

   Love (Charity), the gift of God, [1559]404, [1560]432, [1561]541 sq.;
   for if all gifts from Him, so this the greatest, [1562]542; must
   increase as desire decreases, [1563]394; the good distinguished by,
   from wicked who have other gifts in common with them, [1564]394,
   [1565]407, [1566]408; nothing of use without, [1567]394; "loaf" asked
   for from a father figure of, [1568]432; white raiment hereafter gained
   by labour of, [1569]348; its province to "do," [1570]269; active love
   may be shown by all, [1571]400; divine, wins to God, [1572]396; handle
   of Soul, by which it holds things offered to it, must cease to hold
   world, that it may have fast hold of The Eternal, [1573]478 sq.;
   fulfilling of, the Law, [1574]480; with meditation, sees mysteries,
   [1575]486; to fulfil commandment of, the struggle of life, [1576]492;
   necessary to true martyrdom, [1577]523; how magnified in New Testament,
   [1578]523, [1579]535, [1580]541 sq.; fear of no avail without,
   [1581]540; keepeth from sin, not under fear, but from hatred of sin
   itself, [1582]541; of God and man, the two commandments to salvation,
   [1583]480; of God, sustains, of the world, sinks, [1584]342; of earthly
   things, bird-lime of spirit's wings, [1585]448; not to be limited to
   wives or children, [1586]396; makes hard things easy, [1587]317 sq.,
   [1588]408; sin forgiven and sin prevented both causes for, [1589]417;
   difficulty concerning much or little of, for much or little sin
   forgiven, [1590]416, [1591]417; only care of life to choose proper
   object of, [1592]408; of self, first cause of man's ruin, [1593]408,
   [1594]409; self-love cannot love God, nor abide in self, [1595]408,
   [1596]409.


   Maccabees, example of mother of, [1597]421.

   Macedonians say Holy Ghost is a creature, [1598]320.

   Magicians, Egyptian, wrought miracles, but not therefore better than
   children of Israel who wrought them not, [1599]394.

   Mammon, derivation of word, [1600]450; its signification in Latin,
   [1601]450; of iniquity, wrongly assumed by some to mean plunder and
   oppressive gains, [1602]450; may also mean all worldly riches
   whatsoever, [1603]451.

   Man, frailer than glass, [1604]442; faint image of the Holy Trinity,
   like, yet unlike, [1605]263, [1606]264; made after Image of God, which
   he disfigured by transgression, [1607]290; created good by The Good:
   became evil by free-will, [1608]295; must be loved, because God made:
   but his sin hated, which God made not, [1609]396; tames all, but
   himself, [1610]273; earthward disposition of, figured by woman "bowed
   down," [1611]444; through unrighteousness not listening to Teacher,
   will find Avenger in Righteousness, [1612]333; by effacing what he has
   made himself, becomes well-pleasing to Him who made him, [1613]409,
   [1614]410; has no good but of God, [1615]443, [1616]450; must part with
   his own fulness, that he may be filled with God, [1617]266 sq.; won to
   God by Divine Love, [1618]396; fear of, irrational, [1619]306, for his
   power extends only to body, [1620]306, [1621]307; this fear overcome by
   trust in God made Man, [1622]313; whole race of, from one common
   father, [1623]395; memory, understanding, will of, in their exhibition
   separate, yet in operation inseparable, [1624]264, [1625]265; deeper
   analogies of these to be sought in peace and humility, [1626]265; end
   of, not to understand the creation, but to love the Creator, [1627]314;
   how all men liars, [1628]355.

   Manichæans, deny Incarnation, [1629]401, [1630]457, and "reality" of
   Christ's Body, [1631]338, [1632]339, [1633]456.

   Mappalia, [1634]303 (note).

   Marriage, true union of, oneness of heart in, coheirs of Grace,
   [1635]253; things in, allowed of permission, not of right, [1636]253;
   object of Ancient Fathers in contracting, [1637]253 sq.; chastity in,
   [1638]252 sq., [1639]402; superiority of continence over, [1640]402,
   [1641]505; human honour in, [1642]520.

   Martha. See [1643]Mary.

   Martyrdom, seems to be an exhortation to, in words, "Let him take up
   his cross," etc., [1644]409.

   Martyrs, fear not man, because they fear God, [1645]306, [1646]307;
   mercies of God through, rehearsed in Church, [1647]349; festivals of,
   to be observed with sobriety: excesses at these festivals, [1648]306
   (note); witnesses of Christ: Christ witness in, [1649]492; without Whom
   nothing, [1650]492; none without love, [1651]523.

   Mary, St., the Virgin Mother, [1652]251, [1653]315; a mother without
   carnal desire, [1654]256; humility of, in preferring St. Joseph to
   herself, [1655]251.

   Mary (and Martha), parts of each good, but Mary's better, [1656]427,
   [1657]428, [1658]429 sq.; Mary's endures for ever, [1659]430; two
   sisters figures of life present of holy toil, and of life future of
   Endless Rest begun here, [1660]430; the toil of Martha in hope of the
   Rest of Mary, [1661]430; Martha, type of those who do works of mercy,
   [1662]429; Mary listening, Martha ministering, [1663]429 sq.

   Maximianists, the, [1664]527; divided against Donatists, [1665]319 (and
   note); though first condemned by Donatists, afterwards received by
   them, [1666]388.

   Maximinus, [1667]530 (note).

   Meal, three measures of, the human race, [1668]445.

   Mediator, Christ our, because "in the middle," man, and yet without
   sin, [1669]470.

   Meek, the: character of, [1670]266, [1671]353, [1672]354, [1673]355;
   good which God works in themselves pleasing to, [1674]354, [1675]355;
   evils He sends not displeasing to, [1676]355; meekness necessary in
   this life, [1677]353.

   Mercy, precedes Judgment, [1678]332; time of, so long as we are spared,
   [1679]442; vessels of, of God, all once vessels of wrath, [1680]319;
   mercy in "man" is true alms, [1681]436.

   Milevis, Council of, [1682]504 (note).

   Ministers, of God; to be heard for their office' sake, [1683]479,
   [1684]483, and must not be despised lest the wrong reach to Christ,
   [1685]423 sq.; give not their own, but Christ's, as dispensers of what
   is given to them, [1686]423, [1687]479, [1688]484; good works of flock
   delightful to, [1689]422: mutual love between, and flock, [1690]423;
   evil, out of their hearts bring evil, out of Scripture good, [1691]336,
   and bring good words out of Scripture, as grapes around thorns,
   [1692]425; if seeking something else, yet preach The Word, [1693]425.

   Miracles, performed by bad as well as good, [1694]394; Church first
   founded on visible, but its faith more laudable now without, [1695]379;
   Christ's, on bodies and souls had different effect on different
   persons, [1696]413; had divine and mystical meaning, [1697]414,
   [1698]498 sq.; happen every day as marvellous as extraordinary ones,
   [1699]482, [1700]498; man himself a miracle, [1701]482; power of
   working not so high a gift as humility, [1702]535, and given under the
   elder dispensation, [1703]534; the miracle of "the seven loaves"
   explained, [1704]406.

   Moses, tender prayer of, [1705]387; a witness of Christ in Book of
   Genesis, [1706]498.

   Mourners, true and false consolation of, [1707]266.

   Mysteries, not possession, but love of eminence prevents understanding
   of, [1708]389 sq.


   Name, of God: hallowed in us by making us holy, [1709]275, [1710]281,
   [1711]285, [1712]289; hallowed in us when baptized, [1713]289.

   Nathanael, under fig tree, type of man under sin, [1714]470; this
   interpretation connected with apron of fig leaves, [1715]470; the
   "greater things" promised to, to see God face to face, [1716]472.

   Neighbour, who truly loves himself, loves his, [1717]395; every man
   our, [1718]395.

   Numbers, mystical meaning of, [1719]257, [1720]258 sq., [1721]363,
   [1722]364, [1723]365, [1724]406, [1725]452.


   Obedience, only road to knowledge, [1726]464, [1727]486; its presence
   Life, its absence death, [1728]488; with Faith the Resurrection of the
   soul, [1729]489.

   Offences, against a brother, against Christ, [1730]301; to be "cut
   off," [1731]355, [1732]356; love of God's Law the safeguard against,
   [1733]353; what constitutes, [1734]355; outward troubles not, but to be
   turned to our profit, [1735]353, [1736]356; St. Peter rebuked, that he
   may teach us how to refuse them, [1737]354.

   Oil, in the lamps of the true virgins, charity, [1738]402, [1739]403;
   what meant by selling, [1740]404; lamps without, works done for man,
   not for love of God, [1741]403 sq.

   Olive tree, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob roots of, [1742]347; natural
   branches cut off for pride: wild grafted in for humility, [1743]347; we
   all became from good, wild olive tree, [1744]395.


   Parable, of unforgiving servant, explained, [1745]362-365; of sower who
   went forth to sow, [1746]334, [1747]335, [1748]423; of tares, enforces
   the duty of bearing with evil, [1749]334, [1750]335, and corrects all
   schism under plea of evil in the Church, [1751]386; of fig tree planted
   in vineyard, a warning to us to be fruitful, [1752]332, [1753]443,
   [1754]444; of husbandman who planted a vineyard and let it out to
   husbandmen, explained, [1755]373, [1756]374; of hiring into vineyard,
   explained, [1757]374, [1758]375; of King who made a marriage for His
   Son, teaches that all, good and bad, are invited, but only good
   received, [1759]392-394; of the ten virgins, relates not to religious
   orders only, but to whole Church, [1760]401 sq.; same explained,
   [1761]402-405; of two debtors, comfort to the penitent, and lesson for
   the Pharisee, [1762]416 sq.; of certain man who made a great supper,
   and of the guests who excused themselves, [1763]447, [1764]448; of rich
   man "whose ground had turned out well," examples of covetousness and
   its punishment in, [1765]437, [1766]438, and of luxuriousness,
   [1767]372, [1768]373; of rich man and Lazarus, example of luxuriousness
   in, [1769]373, [1770]426 sq.

   Pardon promised to penitent, but not "to-morrow" to him who delays,
   [1771]361, [1772]362.

   Parents must be honoured, but God obeyed and preferred, [1773]421.

   Passion, the, of our Blessed Lord, troubling waters of Pool of
   Bethesda, [1774]476 sq.

   Patience, of Almighty God, [1775]332; of Christ, [1776]338.

   Patripassians, the error of, [1777]260.

   Paul, St., the border as it were of Christ's Garment, the least and
   last, [1778]300, [1779]345, [1780]347; weak in himself, strong in
   Christ, [1781]341; changed from persecutor to preacher, [1782]457,
   [1783]458; Saul the proud, laid low, to be raised up Paul the humble,
   [1784]343, [1785]422; his former name Saul derived from Saül,
   [1786]343; peculiar nature of his office, [1787]422; witness of Christ,
   [1788]492; good shepherd, [1789]523.

   Paul, of Samosata, false doctrine of, [1790]312 (note).

   Peace, to be found in The Word, [1791]459; not to be looked for from
   the flesh, [1792]503; the end of all our trials, [1793]503.

   Pelagians, errors of, reproved, [1794]295, [1795]455 sq.; the
   "Pharisee" better than, in that he "gave thanks," [1796]455; strive
   against "open" grace, and for that reason worse than Jews, [1797]504.

   Pentecost, the conversion at, fruit of prayer on Cross, [1798]351.

   Persecution, all things in, to be despised for sake of Christ,
   [1799]409 sq.; the attack of Satan from without upon those out of whom
   he has been cast, [1800]537 sq.

   Perseverance, silences opposition, [1801]385; necessary to Christian
   character, [1802]509 sq.; the building on a Rock, [1803]510; freedom
   the reward of, [1804]510.

   Peter, St., so called from the rock, [1805]340; type of Church when in
   danger from man's praise, [1806]339; walking on sea, type of Church in
   the world, [1807]340; in his confession an image of the strong, in his
   fear, of the weak in the Church, [1808]341; weak in himself, strong in
   Christ, [1809]341, [1810]342; his conduct a proof that what we cannot
   do in ourselves we can do in Christ, [1811]341; held chief place in
   Apostleship, [1812]340; of Apostles, first and chiefest, [1813]340,
   [1814]341, [1815]544; blessed when he spoke the things of God, rebuked
   when those of men, [1816]340 sq.; Christ the Rock, St. Peter the
   Christian people, [1817]340; a proof that denial of Christ is not the
   unpardonable sin against Holy Ghost, [1818]330; witness of Christ,
   [1819]492; Church founded singly in, [1820]519; good shepherd,
   [1821]523, [1822]524; figure of unity of all good shepherds, [1823]544;
   our Lord's words to, "Lovest thou Me?" show love to be the sign of the
   true shepherd, [1824]521, [1825]524; disturbed at our Lord's Passion,
   [1826]544.

   Pharisees, the one in the parable lauded himself, but did not pray,
   [1827]455; the proud thoughts of him who invited Him, known to our
   Lord, [1828]416; they were the choice men amongst the Jews, [1829]435;
   scrupulous as to external purification, neglected internal, [1830]435;
   their want of love made their greater alms of no value, [1831]435,
   [1832]436; their leaven, seeking glory from one another, [1833]446;
   their zeal "not according to knowledge," [1834]496.

   Philip, eye of, healed by faith so that he might see the Father in
   Christ, [1835]380.

   Philosophers (Heathen), saw God at a distance, but saw not way to Him,
   [1836]531; saw God in works of nature, [1837]531; idolatry, their
   folly, [1838]531 sq.

   Philosophy, natural, the gift of God, but abused if it has not love,
   [1839]314, [1840]315.

   Photinians, divided against Arians, [1841]319; asserting that Christ is
   only man, [1842]320, [1843]401; deny existence of Holy Ghost,
   [1844]320.

   Pool. See [1845]Bethesda.

   Poor, our carriers who carry our goods for us to heaven, [1846]293; the
   portion of departed children to be given to Christ through, [1847]372;
   God the receiver for, [1848]369, and Christ the Keeper for, [1849]446,
   and will repay for them in world to come, [1850]426 sq., [1851]474; to
   give to, to give to God of His own, [1852]474; they should seek only
   sufficiency, since all not needed, a burden, [1853]368; warnings to
   them, [1854]367; the rich, if humble, better than they if proud,
   [1855]367.

   Possessions, we must so possess, as not to be possessed by, [1856]479.

   Poverty, voluntary, not to be despised in those who can receive it,
   [1857]479; not perfect without love, [1858]535.

   Praise, danger of human, and preservative against it, [1859]339;
   flatterers, sellers of, [1860]404.

   Prayer, our only hope in evils of this life, [1861]349-352; the part of
   those in peril, [1862]454; sleeps when desire grows cold, [1863]352;
   unceasing longing is unceasing prayer, [1864]352; enlightens ignorance,
   [1865]431; for enemies a duty, [1866]276; need of, if we would cure our
   soul's sicknesses, [1867]350; double alms ("give and forgive"), wings
   of, [1868]287; faith fountain of, [1869]454; benefit of persevering,
   [1870]430, as shown by parable of unjust judge and of the "friend,"
   [1871]296, [1872]430 sq., [1873]454; why we are not to omit, although
   it be that God knoweth our wants before we ask, [1874]275, [1875]361;
   where earnest affection in, there effectual answer from Him who heareth
   it, [1876]275; what we ask in, would be given if good for us,
   [1877]352, but that we may in ignorance ask evil, no cause for not
   asking, [1878]350; two things to be learnt, what we are to ask in and
   from Whom, [1879]274 sq.; need of piety in, not of wordiness,
   [1880]275; precepts concerning not using "many words" in, reconciled
   with commands to "ask, seek, knock," [1881]349 sq.; heard when offered
   in submission of mind, not with restlessness, [1882]540.

   Prayer, Lord's, the: explained, [1883]274-280, [1884]280-284,
   [1885]284-288, [1886]288-289; the rule and standard of all prayer,
   [1887]275; the blessing of, taught by our Advocate and Judge,
   [1888]284; said daily in church before altar, [1889]288; taught to the
   Competentes after the Creed, [1890]274, [1891]284; repeated by them at
   Baptism, [1892]284, [1893]288; undoes past sin, provides against
   future, [1894]280; remedy against daily venial sins, [1895]277; with
   alms, [1896]277; great importance of petition for forgiveness in,
   [1897]278; Apostles needed daily remission through, much more we,
   [1898]286; three first petitions of, relate to the Life Eternal, the
   rest to necessities of present life, [1899]280, [1900]282, [1901]287,
   [1902]288, [1903]289.

   Pride, the worm of riches, [1904]297, [1905]367; greater in man who is
   mortal, than in Satan who is immortal, [1906]412; trust in God with
   alms its cure, [1907]297; God made Man great remedy against, [1908]345,
   [1909]475; death, its penalty, should be its cure, [1910]412; mysteries
   hid from, [1911]315; destroys our gifts, [1912]502; prevents us from
   returning by "strait way," [1913]533; incompatible with love,
   [1914]475, [1915]535; Christ repelled the proud man who would have
   followed Him, [1916]298.

   Priests, peril of office of, [1917]362; in Old Testament were to offer
   for themselves, [1918]514.

   Princes, as God's ministers, may restrain heathen or heretics,
   [1919]303, [1920]304.

   Promises, having done what God commands, we may ask for His, [1921]442.

   Prophets, foretold evil, but did not wish it, [1922]275; words of,
   explained by their acts, [1923]388.

   Psalms, imprecations in, not curses, but predictions, [1924]275.

   Pure, the, "reach" God, [1925]460, [1926]485.


   Rebuke, for secret sins, to be given secretly, [1927]360 sq.; St.
   Joseph an example of this, [1928]360 sq.; for public, publicly,
   [1929]360; given by St. Stephen severely, but in love, [1930]396; love
   should always accompany, [1931]358; with meekness and charity,
   [1932]385.

   Reconciliation, necessity of, with an aggrieved brother, before
   acceptance with God, [1933]358, [1934]359; difficulty of persuading men
   to the self-humiliation necessary for, although the real humiliation
   their own sin, [1935]359.

   Remission, of sin, article in the Creed, [1936]286; given by Holy Ghost
   through Church, [1937]325, [1938]329-332, [1939]419; first gift of
   Spirit in Baptism, [1940]324; given not by man, but by God, [1941]418;
   through man or without man, [1942]419; Apostles taught to pray for,
   [1943]286; joint gift of The Three Persons in the Holy Trinity,
   [1944]326; effect of, deliverance from dominion of Satan, [1945]330;
   "Seventy times seven," complete remission, [1946]365.

   Repentance, useless if barren of its fruit, almsgiving, [1947]294;
   figured by Lazarus raised from dead, [1948]415; place of, not denied in
   Church to any sins whatever, [1949]320; time of mercy granted for,
   [1950]442.

   Repetition not wearisome in divine things, [1951]475.

   Rest, our, foreshadowed by God's after work of creation, [1952]477 sq.

   Restituta, the great church in Carthage, [1953]392 (note).

   Resurrection, of body, ordained for all, [1954]488 sq.; difference
   between that of good and bad, [1955]489; great and incredible, but not
   more so than our first creation, [1956]491.

   Rhadagaisus, [1957]434 (note).

   Rich, the: equal with poor in life and death, [1958]296, [1959]297,
   [1960]368; danger of, in attaining to salvation, [1961]366, [1962]367;
   may use luxuries which their infirmities demand, if careful to give
   necessaries to poor, [1963]297, [1964]298; must lay out what they have,
   that they may receive what they have not, [1965]367; need not give all
   to poor, but must exceed a tenth, the Scribes' and Pharisees' portion,
   [1966]367; by them God helps the needy, and by needy proves them,
   [1967]368; real wants of, not more than those of poor, [1968]297 sq.;
   if humble, better than poor if proud, [1969]367; warned against pride,
   [1970]367; two kinds of, those of this world, and those of the next
   (i.e., the poor), [1971]367; have "received" all, and therefore give
   nothing of their own, [1972]474. See [1973]Alms.

   Riches, only good when we do good with, [1974]295, being means of good,
   not goods in themselves, [1975]295 sq., [1976]333; with desire of more,
   a passion, [1977]295 sq., [1978]333; use of, [1979]297 sq., [1980]367;
   acquisition of, man's great vanity and source of unhappiness,
   [1981]290; vanity of, because nothing lasting in, [1982]290 sq.,
   [1983]367; various mischances to which they are subject, [1984]291; to
   neglect Christ's words as to use of, to neglect Christ, [1985]291 sq.;
   who teaches us how to use them speaking to us as "one from dead,"
   [1986]373; by laying up, on earth, we lay up for earth, [1987]292;
   calamities warn us to remove, to Heaven, [1988]292 sq.; the poor our
   carriers to remove our, to Heaven, [1989]293; great danger of coveting,
   [1990]368; possession of, the world's test of happiness (as contrasted
   with that of Holy Scripture, God), [1991]451, [1992]452, why called
   "mammon of iniquity," [1993]450, [1994]451; pride the worm of,
   [1995]297, [1996]367.

   Riches, the True, what they are--cannot be lost, [1997]451; must be
   sought from and to God, [1998]452; consist in not requiring worldly
   riches, which we lose, that we may gain the True, and not be lost
   ourselves, [1999]346.

   Righteous, the: though many, in comparison with wicked few, [2000]386,
   [2001]393; do righteousness for God, and account it God's, [2002]272.

   Righteousness, burning lights, [2003]440; exercised in bearing the
   present, and fasting from world, [2004]479.

   Rogatists, the, [2005]527.

   Rome, founded by Trojans, [2006]357; built by Romulus, [2007]356; by
   Rome is meant the people of, not the city of: these will not perish if
   they praise God, if they blaspheme Him will, [2008]356 sq.; Christians
   care for, though heathen, because the Church sojourns in it, [2009]433,
   [2010]434; gods of, senseless, [2011]357, [2012]434; destruction of,
   falsely attributed to Christianity, [2013]433-435.


   Sabbath, the, how typical of our Lord, [2014]515 sq.

   Sabellians, called also by some Patripassians, as holding that the
   Father suffered, [2015]320.

   Samaritan, Good, the, figures baptism, [2016]503. See [2017]Baptism and
   [2018]Church.

   Samaritan woman. See [2019]Woman.

   Samaritans, the harvest ripe among, [2020]422 sq.

   Satan, slanders the good subtly, that we may think good hopeless,
   [2021]398; possesses us if God abandons us, [2022]282, but is conquered
   by our conquering self, [2023]283; torments of, to Christian, lightened
   by joys within, [2024]318.

   Saved, the: the teaching of the "strait gate" proves to be few,
   [2025]445 sq.; few, that is, compared with the lost, but many that the
   Garner of Heaven may be filled, [2026]446.

   Schism, wickedness of those who cause, [2027]319, [2028]437, [2029]478.

   Scribes, the: who they were, [2030]335; though they had the keys of the
   kingdom of heaven, not "instructed" in it, [2031]335; though evil, to
   be heard and obeyed, as "sitting in Moses' seat," [2032]336.

   Scripture, Holy: "the hem of" Christ's "garment" to heal us, [2033]300;
   "how to be read," [2034]259; pictures what it tells us, to our hearts,
   [2035]415 sq.; sometimes says things absolutely, to be interpreted in a
   limited sense, [2036]321, [2037]323; reckons in round numbers,
   [2038]257; idolatrous feasts forbidden by, [2039]300; godliness seeking
   truth, and humility, the key to, not mere criticism, [2040]247; some
   words and acts in, literal, [2041]390, some figurative, [2042]390,
   [2043]391, some both, [2044]390-392; terms in, not to be judged of by
   their use in world, [2045]335; exposition of, the setting forth of a
   banquet, to be received with praise, and followed by good works,
   [2046]406; we feed on plain parts of, [2047]321; are exercised by
   obscure, [2048]322, [2049]360, [2050]484; apparent contradictions,
   [2051]271, [2052]359; these opened to prayer, but not to be judged of,
   [2053]359 sq.; expressions in, teaching special earnestness, seemingly
   exaggerated, [2054]424; perverted by wicked, [2055]519; sense of,
   preserved by looking at whole, [2056]520.

   Self, by stopping short in, we go out of, [2057]409; by denying, we
   turn to God, [2058]409; the duty of each to deny, as he has attained,
   [2059]411.

   Senses, the five: indicated by the five virgins, [2060]402, by the five
   pairs of oxen, [2061]447; the windows of the soul, [2062]307, through
   which it perceives, [2063]263; useless when the inhabitant is gone,
   [2064]307; they who believe only, are kept back from higher things,
   [2065]447, [2066]448; for not their satisfaction, but faith, our food,
   [2067]448; sight, as the most eminent of them, stands for all of,
   [2068]449.

   Serpent, the, in what to be feared, in what imitated, [2069]305 sq.

   Seven, mystical meaning of, [2070]363, [2071]365, [2072]406, [2073]452.

   Seventy and seven, mystical meaning of, [2074]258 sq., [2075]363,
   [2076]365.

   Shepherds, true: they who preach for love, [2077]520, [2078]544; by
   which distinguished from hireling, [2079]521; figured in St. Peter,
   [2080]521, and their unity in the same Apostle, [2081]544; fewer than
   hirelings, [2082]544; prepared for every good work, [2083]521; act as,
   in God's presence, [2084]522; reprove and mourn for sin, [2085]522;
   awfulness of office of, [2086]543.

   Ship, the Cross the, in which our weakness is carried over tempests of
   world, [2087]337; peril within, from storms of passion, destruction out
   of it, [2088]338; if Christ be absent from, each man the prey of storms
   within himself, [2089]338.

   Sick, the: amongst Jews of two kinds, those who knew their own
   sickness, and came for health to Christ, those who knew it not, and
   mocked, [2090]350 sq.

   Silence does not always imply absence of feeling, but want of power,
   [2091]461, [2092]468.

   Siloa, [2093]512.

   Simon Magus, [2094]419.

   Sin, transgression--when man seeking "more" exceeds rule of justice,
   [2095]258; not to be despised because committed only against man,
   [2096]358, [2097]359, for sins against Christ in brethren unless they
   gain us anew, destruction, [2098]358; God's Grace alone prevents,
   [2099]417, [2100]418; altogether from man himself, [2101]409,
   [2102]410, [2103]421 sq.; must be rebuked and subjected to discipline
   without violation of unity, [2104]387, [2105]388; itself the only real
   humiliation, not amends for, [2106]359; hearts which mourn for, bear
   Christ's mark, [2107]438; difficulty of overcoming inveterate habit of,
   [2108]415; a fourfold progress in, [2109]415; even Beloved Apostle
   acknowledged himself to be under, [2110]453; what, it was which Jews
   contracted by coming of our Lord, [2111]321; "they had not had sin"
   means not, any sin at all, but this one great sin, [2112]322; actions
   which lead to, are themselves sin, [2113]301; they who entice us to,
   "offences," [2114]354, [2115]355 sq.; known privately to priest, in no
   case to revealed, [2116]360 sq.; consent makes desire sin,[2117]287;
   dangerous sophisms about sins of flesh, [2118]361; God forgives, by man
   through Holy Spirit dwelling in them, [2119]419; mercifulness redeems,
   want of it retains, [2120]294; must "be," but must not "reign" in us,
   [2121]493; made slaves and dead by, [2122]510 sq.; Christ Himself made
   sacrifice for, [2123]511; all under, [2124]514, as shown by Lord's
   Prayer, given even to Apostles, [2125]514; much evil-doing no excuse
   for, [2126]543 sq.; to some sins, a severe and certain condemnation
   due, [2127]277; lesser sins, [2128]278, [2129]284, [2130]286 sq.;
   lesser, not to be despised, [2131]287; compared by these, when free
   from greater, [2132]278; great peril of them, [2133]278.

   Sin, original, [2134]275, [2135]278, [2136]316, [2137]381, [2138]395,
   [2139]410, [2140]444, [2141]456.

   Sinner, the: must rise from his sin speedily, however foul and deep it
   be, [2142]415 sq.; our Lord's conduct to the, rebukes exclusiveness of
   heretics, [2143]418, [2144]419; only heard if penitent, [2145]513;
   dead, though to eye alive and moving, [2146]308.

   Six, the, ages of world, [2147]477.

   Son, the. See [2148]Word, The. Worketh with, not separately from, the
   Father and Holy Ghost, [2149]484, [2150]485; commandment of Father to,
   not to be taken in a carnal sense, [2151]530; "seeing what the Father
   doeth," relates to, as God, [2152]485, [2153]486, and is inseparable
   from Divine nature of, [2154]486; Eternity of, [2155]488; was made what
   He made, to redeem what He made, [2156]489; God-Man, [2157]489; will
   judge as Son of man as He was judged, [2158]489 sq.; our life of His,
   His death of ours, [2159]489 sq.; Father's works His, because all that
   is Father's, His, [2160]512; having one Will and one Power with Father,
   [2161]513; of one Substance with Father, [2162]527, not one in mere
   will, else man might be one with, [2163]530; coequal with Father,
   [2164]431, [2165]527 sq., [2166]529, [2167]530; highest blasphemy to
   deny coequality of, [2168]528; blasphemy against, not forgiven, because
   inferior in His manhood, [2169]326; Father honoured, and outraged, in,
   [2170]528 sq., [2171]530; begotten out of time, made in time,
   [2172]529; "the True God and Everlasting Life," [2173]530; the Father,
   though not incarnate (see [2174]Sabellians), doeth all by, [2175]260,
   [2176]261; acts of, in flesh, acts of Father and Son, [2177]261; "our
   Father" teaches that we are sons through, [2178]281.

   Sons, men become God's, by God's Grace, [2179]281, [2180]355,
   [2181]477.

   Sophisms, rejected by moral instinct fearing to displease God,
   [2182]355.

   Soul, the: an image of the Holy Trinity, [2183]264; may die, [2184]307;
   despair and false hope, death of, [2185]376; God the Life of, His
   absence the death of, [2186]299, [2187]307, [2188]308; gives life to
   body, [2189]307 sq., but this not its own life, [2190]307; departure of
   God from, to be mourned more than departure of it from body, [2191]308;
   by fearing death of, true life of body saved, [2192]308; man by
   destroying the body does but give release to, [2193]307; God's
   husbandry in, and its object and effects, [2194]373.

   Spirit, Holy, the: is God, [2195]323, [2196]328 (see [2197]Trinity);
   the Spirit of the Father and Son, [2198]320-323 sq., [2199]388; equal
   with the Father and the Son, [2200]324, [2201]431; the gift of God,
   [2202]324, [2203]431; signified under name of "Fire," [2204]324 sq.;
   the Creator, Bread, Shepherd, Unchangeable, [2205]431; sometimes given
   through ministry of man, sometimes apart from, [2206]419 (and note);
   given visibly by Apostles, invisibly now, [2207]419; Sadducees denied
   existence of, [2208]320; likewise Photinians, Arians, Eunomians, and
   Macedonians deny Divinity of, [2209]320, and Sabellians, [2210]320;
   persons may have, and know not that they have, [2211]329; "the bond of
   peace," test of presence of, now, as once gift of tongues, [2212]328;
   by fellowship of, are made One Body of One Only Son of God, [2213]328;
   one thing to be born of, another to be nourished by, [2214]324;
   remission of sins the gift of, in the Church, [2215]328-330; are made
   sons of God by, [2216]494; that by which we fight against ourselves,
   [2217]494.

   Spirit, blasphemy against, one of most important and difficult
   questions in Holy Scripture, [2218]321; what it is, not particularly
   expressed, but to be enquired into, [2219]321; the expression
   "blasphemy" restricted, [2220]322; difficulty in language of St. Mark
   and St. Luke concerning, [2221]322; wrongly supposed to consist in
   great sins, or apostasy, of baptized, [2222]320 sq.; not all, but some
   certain, said to be unforgiven, [2223]321, [2224]322, [2225]323;
   consists in final impenitence, [2226]325; though expressed by the
   single term "word," extends to every word and thought against power of
   absolution granted to Church, [2227]325, [2228]326, [2229]330; not
   denial of Christ, as proved by St. Peter's case, [2230]330; does not
   mean that Holy Ghost alone of the three Holy Persons forgives,
   [2231]326, [2232]327; warning against, so expressed, as to show that
   sin is forgiven only in Church, [2233]331; some kind of, as of heathen,
   forgiven, [2234]319, but this last not the blasphemy of Jews and
   Heretics, [2235]319 sq.

   Spirit, who are "the poor in," [2236]266.

   Spiritual things, not to be judged by fleshly thoughts, [2237]459;
   meditation on, better than words on, [2238]460.

   Stephen, St., prayer and martyrdom of, [2239]396; as martyr witness of
   Christ, [2240]492.

   Stones ("stones will cry out"), idolaters, meaning of this name so
   applied, [2241]469.

   Strangers, we as strangers here should cherish such, [2242]446.

   Strong, he who thinks himself, weak, [2243]341; man, the, binding of,
   figures our being bound by bonds of Christ's Passion, [2244]499.

   Superiors, how far to be obeyed, [2245]300 sq., [2246]302; not to be
   dreaded on account of their evil designs, [2247]302, [2248]303,
   [2249]355, [2250]412, [2251]439 sq.; friendship of, to be disregarded
   when it stands in the way of our salvation, [2252]377.

   Supper, the: Jews called to, we called and led and forced, [2253]447;
   meaning of the three excuses of those who refused to come to,
   [2254]447, [2255]448; Gentiles, those from streets and lanes: heretics,
   those from hedges, [2256]449; "all" required to come to, [2257]449.

   Synagogue, the, figured by the barren fig tree, [2258]389.


   Tabernacles, the feast of, [2259]506; the eleven curtains of haircloth
   of the Tabernacle, typical meaning of, [2260]365.

   Tares, even in high places of Church, [2261]335; these seen by Angels,
   and not by men, [2262]335.

   Temperance--girded loins, [2263]440.

   Temple, the Christian everywhere Christ's, [2264]361; we must therefore
   fear to offend Him who dwelleth in it, [2265]361.

   Temptation, the wind in the tempest, [2266]304 sq., [2267]342; anger
   the deadliest, as cutting off means of pardon, [2268]283; advances or
   gives way in proportion with faith, [2269]454; two kinds of, one
   proving, one inducing us to sin, [2270]282, [2271]323: brings out
   previously existing evil, [2272]481.

   Tempter, the: overcome by conquering self, [2273]283; overcome when we
   have learnt to despise him, [2274]473.

   Ten, mystical meaning of, [2275]258 sq.

   Ten thousand, mystical meaning of, [2276]364.

   Testament, typical use of the Old, not taken away in the New, but the
   veil removed from it, [2277]336 sq.; the Old and New agreeable the one
   to the other, [2278]359.

   Thirty and eight years, infirmity of, typical of the law unfulfilled,
   [2279]480; when fulfilled typified by forty, [2280]480.

   Times, the, we make our own, such as we are ourselves, such they,
   [2281]352.

   Tobias, blind, saw inwardly by light of righteousness, his wife
   outwardly by light of sun, [2282]384.

   Tongue, the: "no man," but God only, "can tame," [2283]273; sins of, to
   be shunned, [2284]442.

   Transfiguration, the: the Apostles saw Christ's kingdom in, and how,
   [2285]347; St. Peter's wish at, would have made three, where there is
   but One, [2286]347 sq.; voice from heaven at, indicates the superiority
   of Christ's Kingdom over all, [2287]348; our Lord remained alone after,
   Law and Prophets passing away, [2288]348; prostration of disciples at,
   the oneness of Law and prophets with Christ, how figured in, [2289]349.

   Transgression, the number "eleven" typical of, [2290]258, [2291]364.

   Tree, the unfruitful, the three years in parable of, signify God's
   visiting the world before, under, and since the Law, [2292]332.

   Tribulation, the Baptism "with fire" may be understood of, [2293]324; a
   cleansing or destroying fire according to our use of it, [2294]356;
   foretold by Christ, [2295]356; swiftness in flying from trouble, and
   slowness in doing good increase, [2296]290; not great, because in
   duration short, [2297]290; wisest to take counsel from Christ in,
   [2298]290; when it comes, to be accepted, that we may be healed,
   [2299]381; by patience and faith avails to our profit, [2300]353; no
   cause for distress, if Christ be in us, [2301]356; duty of blessing God
   in, [2302]432 sq.

   Trinity, Holy, the: One God, [2303]259 sq., [2304]323, [2305]324,
   [2306]428, [2307]431; a great thing to speak of, [2308]259; man faint
   image of, like and unlike, not as Son is image, [2309]263 sq.; persons
   of, distinct, [2310]259, [2311]265, [2312]324, [2313]326-329 sq., as
   shown in our Lord's Baptism, [2314]258, yet operation of, one and
   inseparable, [2315]259, [2316]260, [2317]265 sq., [2318]324,
   [2319]326-329 sq., [2320]428, [2321]484 sq.; analogies of, in memory,
   understanding, and will, though not exact in comparison, meditation
   requisite, [2322]265 sq.; Property and particular Subsistence of each
   Person in, preserved, [2323]324 (and note); works ascribed to one
   Person in, do not exclude operation of the other Persons, [2324]261,
   [2325]262, [2326]326-328, [2327]329 sq.; the "three loaves," man's life
   and food, [2328]431; truth of, cleared to meditating love, [2329]487
   sq.

   Troubling of waters. See [2330]Bethesda.

   Two, the meaning of the number, so often used in New Testament,
   [2331]519.


   Understanding, that to which Faith attains, [2332]481, [2333]527.

   Unity, of Law, Prophets, and Gospel, [2334]347, [2335]349; the virtue
   apprehended in the Eucharist, [2336]282; to forsake, to violate
   charity, [2337]386; mysterious greatness and blessedness of, [2338]428,
   [2339]430; typified by the "one" Person who descended to pool,
   [2340]475, [2341]478; holdeth Church together, [2342]517; figured in
   the "One" Good Shepherd, [2343]523, [2344]532.

   Unseen things, the evidence of the seen, as shown in works of Creation,
   [2345]482.

   Usury, God longs to give us, for what we lend Him in poor, [2346]369;
   who practises, rebuked by Church, confuted by Word of God, and
   execrated by the brethren, [2347]369.


   Valley, typical of humility, [2348]502.

   Veil, the, rending of, figured discovery of secrets of Law, [2349]519.

   Virgil, might repudiate in his own person his own false predictions,
   [2350]433.

   Virgins, all so called from abstinence from unlawful desires,
   [2351]401, [2352]402; honour of, began with the Virgin Mary, [2353]255.
   See [2354]Celibacy and [2355]Chastity.


   Watch, the fourth, meaning of, [2356]338.

   Watchfulness, must be with the heart, faith, hope, charity, and good
   works, [2357]405; now our lamps flicker, [2358]405.

   Water, our Lord turned, into wine, that men might believe, [2359]473.

   Weakness, who feels, is strong, [2360]341; remains after Baptism until
   death, [2361]503.

   Wedding garment, the: not anything which good and bad may both have, so
   not belief, [2362]407 sq.; not the sacraments, or fasting, or power of
   miracles, [2363]394, but Love, [2364]394, [2365]407, [2366]408; must be
   in the heart, not on the body, [2367]393; want of, a very grievous
   fault, [2368]407; the "man without," a figure of the "many called," but
   not "chosen," [2369]407.

   Wheat, figure of Gospel as opposed to Law, [2370]499.

   Wicked, the: mingled with the good, but must be tolerated, [2371]334,
   [2372]352 sq., [2373]385, [2374]386, [2375]393; separation from,
   understood by Donatists corporally, spiritually by Catholics,
   [2376]387; communicating with, makes us not answerable for their evil,
   [2377]385; prophets rebuked, but joined in Divine rites with,
   [2378]387; are known, not to men, but to angels, [2379]335; may become
   good, [2380]334 sq.; all men found so, at coming of Christ, [2381]332;
   all so, in a certain sense (even Apostles), [2382]392; malice of, like
   a razor, touching only what is superfluous in us, [2383]302.

   Widow, the: son of, dead and raised, type of those reclaimed after
   overt acts of sin, [2384]414.

   Will of God, done by victory of Saints, and conversion of sinners,
   [2385]285; the prayer that it may "be done," a prayer for perfection,
   [2386]276.

   Wisdom, the Second Person of the Holy Trinity, [2387]327, [2388]459;
   God takes away His, when we claim it as our own, [2389]315.

   Wise, they only who profess themselves "fools" before God and men,
   [2390]313.

   Witness, Christ's, of Himself, how not true, [2391]491.

   Woman, sin came "by," salvation "through," [2392]246; the word in
   Hebrew equivalent to female, [2393]252 (and note), [2394]261.

   Woman, penitent, the, devotion of, [2395]416; comfort to, of our Lord's
   Parable, [2396]416; as she owed more, loved more, [2397]417; knew
   Christ, who forgave her "as God," [2398]418.

   Woman, the, with an issue of blood, healed, a type of those who touch
   Christ's hem by faith, and are healed, [2399]299 sq., [2400]344.

   Woman, Canaanitish, the: perseverance of, in prayer, [2401]345; figure
   of Church from among Gentiles, to whom Christ was not sent, [2402]345;
   an example of humility, [2403]342, through which she was changed,
   [2404]345, [2405]347.

   Woman, of Samaria, the, knew of Christ's coming from the Prophets,
   [2406]422.

   Word, The: hidden that He might redeem: has arisen to judge, [2407]445;
   Christ, the, above us: the Flesh, among us: the Word-Flesh, between God
   and man, [2408]445 (and note); without price as surpassing all things,
   [2409]458; must buy, with ourselves, [2410]459; they who would procure,
   must have godly will, [2411]459; peace in, [2412]459; they that buy,
   give themselves, yet gain themselves, [2413]459; comprehends all, but
   comprehended by none, [2414]459, [2415]466; they who would understand,
   must not follow flesh, [2416]466; to be comprehended through obedience,
   [2417]486; the Form, Foundation, Head-Stone, of all things: all things
   in and under, [2418]459; Incomprehensibleness of, our sorrow, and duty
   of aspiring to comprehension of, [2419]459; can receive no addition
   from us, Perfect, Unlimited by space or time, [2420]459; unlike bodies
   which we see, not less in Parts than in Whole, [2421]460; born of God,
   but incorporeally, inviolably, unchangeably, and without temporal
   nativity, [2422]460; made man, that we might attain to God, [2423]464,
   and thus might hear in Him what else we could not have borne,
   [2424]464; thus made as "milk" to us, [2425]464; the Creator of all
   things, [2426]465-467; God, [2427]465-467; not made, but born,
   [2428]465, [2429]466; changed that which It was Itself made, [2430]466;
   became less, that we might be more, [2431]467; descended that we might
   ascend: accepted our death, and gave us Life: was at once with us and
   the Father, [2432]467; Maker of His own mother, [2433]467; the word of
   man gives some faint analogy of, [2434]467, [2435]468; the blessedness
   of having seen, beyond all words, [2436]467 sq.; the visible works of
   God, if we lay aside their "finite" nature, suggest thoughts of,
   [2437]467 sq.; Giver of immortality to flesh, [2438]474; makes
   enduring, [2439]474; endures Itself, [2440]475; the Lord of Angels,
   [2441]477.

   Works, good: to be seen, not for our own glory, but for God's,
   [2442]271, [2443]272; cannot be done by those abiding in state of evil,
   [2444]332 sq.; charity the root of all, [2445]333; peril of delay in,
   [2446]361 sq.

   World, the: a sea, [2447]340, [2448]342; one great patient, [2449]377;
   a scorpion, [2450]432; a furnace, to purify or destroy, [2451]302; more
   severely chastened now, because it knows God's Will, [2452]333; seeks
   to make us "look back," and fix our hope on present, [2453]432,
   [2454]433; perishes, [2455]433; overcome for us by Christ, [2456]412;
   the evil in, a warning that we love it not, [2457]352; bitterness
   mingled with the bliss of, that we may look on, [2458]432 sq.; called
   away from love of, that we may hope for, and love another, [2459]440;
   things of, must be endured, not loved, [2460]434; difficulty of
   trampling on, when all things are smooth, [2461]342; must not cleave
   to, in its old age, lest we lose renewal in Christ, [2462]356; Christ
   foretold decay of, [2463]356; "fourth watch," end of, [2464]338;
   natural philosophy of, the foolish wisdom, [2465]313, [2466]314; six
   ages of, [2467]477; love of; and of God, incompatible, [2468]479;
   restraint from, speeds to God, [2469]480; must sit loose to, [2470]481;
   friendship of, evil: deceitful, [2471]481; naught suffices us in, save
   our Creator, [2472]481; love of, whoredom, confusion of face its cure,
   [2473]532; two worlds, evil and good, [2474]354, [2475]410, one
   persecuting, the other persecuted, [2476]410, one condemned, the other
   reconciled, [2477]410; the world that "knew not" Christ, the wicked and
   unbelieving, not world of nature, [2478]469.


   Yoke of Christ, in appearance severe: becomes easy when borne in hope
   and love, [2479]317 sq.

   Young, the, temptations of, strong, [2480]494.


   Zacchæus acquired his goods unjustly, [2481]450 sq.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [2482]1   [2483]1:1   [2484]1:1   [2485]1:1   [2486]1:1   [2487]1:3
   [2488]1:6   [2489]1:7   [2490]1:16   [2491]1:26   [2492]1:26
   [2493]1:27   [2494]1:27   [2495]1:27   [2496]1:31   [2497]2:2
   [2498]2:17   [2499]2:22   [2500]2:22   [2501]2:22   [2502]2:24
   [2503]2:25   [2504]2:25   [2505]3   [2506]3:7   [2507]3:7   [2508]3:7
   [2509]3:19   [2510]3:19   [2511]3:19   [2512]3:19   [2513]3:19
   [2514]3:19   [2515]3:19   [2516]3:19   [2517]5:24   [2518]6:17
   [2519]7   [2520]7:4   [2521]7:22   [2522]12:1-2   [2523]12:3
   [2524]12:3   [2525]15:5   [2526]15:13   [2527]16:2   [2528]17:5
   [2529]19:9   [2530]19:26   [2531]22:16   [2532]22:17   [2533]22:18
   [2534]22:18   [2535]22:18   [2536]22:18   [2537]22:18   [2538]22:18
   [2539]24:5   [2540]24:37   [2541]25:25-26   [2542]25:27   [2543]26:4
   [2544]26:4   [2545]28:11   [2546]28:11   [2547]28:14   [2548]29:23
   [2549]29:28   [2550]30   [2551]32:24   [2552]32:26   [2553]32:28
   [2554]35:10   [2555]35:10   [2556]39:7-12   [2557]43:16
   [2558]48:5-6   [2559]48:5-6

   Exodus

   [2560]2:10   [2561]2:10   [2562]3:5   [2563]3:15   [2564]7   [2565]7
   [2566]8   [2567]20:4   [2568]20:12   [2569]20:13   [2570]20:17
   [2571]21:24   [2572]23:24   [2573]26:7   [2574]26:7   [2575]32
   [2576]32:10   [2577]32:32   [2578]34:28

   Leviticus

   [2579]4:29   [2580]16   [2581]19:18   [2582]22:11

   Numbers

   [2583]15:36   [2584]30:2   [2585]31:18   [2586]31:18   [2587]32:13

   Deuteronomy

   [2588]5:20   [2589]6:4   [2590]6:13   [2591]7:1   [2592]7:5
   [2593]9:9   [2594]12:3   [2595]13:3   [2596]13:3   [2597]13:3
   [2598]13:3   [2599]16:18   [2600]24:1   [2601]25:5   [2602]32:39

   Joshua

   [2603]5:3   [2604]9:15

   Judges

   [2605]6:37   [2606]14   [2607]21:11

   1 Samuel

   [2608]1:26   [2609]5:3   [2610]18:29   [2611]20:42   [2612]21:6

   2 Samuel

   [2613]12:1   [2614]12:1-14

   1 Kings

   [2615]17:6   [2616]18:26   [2617]18:40   [2618]19:6   [2619]19:8
   [2620]19:8

   2 Kings

   [2621]1:10   [2622]2:21   [2623]4   [2624]4:29   [2625]5

   2 Chronicles

   [2626]19:7

   Job

   [2627]1:9   [2628]1:11   [2629]1:21   [2630]1:21   [2631]1:21
   [2632]1:21   [2633]1:21   [2634]2:9   [2635]2:10   [2636]7:1
   [2637]7:1

   Psalms

   [2638]1:1   [2639]1:1   [2640]2:1   [2641]2:2   [2642]2:6   [2643]2:7
   [2644]2:7   [2645]2:8   [2646]2:9   [2647]2:11   [2648]2:12
   [2649]2:13   [2650]3:1   [2651]3:2   [2652]3:3   [2653]3:4
   [2654]3:5   [2655]3:8   [2656]4:2   [2657]4:4   [2658]4:4   [2659]4:4
   [2660]4:4   [2661]4:24   [2662]5:5   [2663]5:6   [2664]5:6   [2665]6
   [2666]6:4   [2667]6:5   [2668]6:7   [2669]6:7   [2670]6:7
   [2671]6:47   [2672]8:4   [2673]8:4   [2674]9:7   [2675]9:9
   [2676]9:19   [2677]9:19   [2678]10:1   [2679]10:1   [2680]10:1
   [2681]10:4   [2682]11:5   [2683]11:5   [2684]11:10   [2685]11:10
   [2686]12:2   [2687]12:5-6   [2688]12:9   [2689]12:9   [2690]13:3
   [2691]13:3   [2692]14:1   [2693]14:1   [2694]14:2-3   [2695]15:4
   [2696]15:5   [2697]15:13   [2698]15:16   [2699]16:2   [2700]16:4
   [2701]16:5   [2702]16:10   [2703]16:10   [2704]16:11   [2705]16:11
   [2706]16:11   [2707]16:11   [2708]16:11   [2709]17:4   [2710]17:5
   [2711]17:7   [2712]17:8   [2713]17:15   [2714]17:44-45   [2715]18:3
   [2716]18:3   [2717]18:22   [2718]18:22   [2719]18:22   [2720]18:22
   [2721]18:22   [2722]18:24   [2723]18:26   [2724]18:28
   [2725]18:43-44   [2726]18:43-44   [2727]19:1   [2728]19:1
   [2729]19:1-6   [2730]19:3-4   [2731]19:4   [2732]19:4   [2733]19:5
   [2734]19:5   [2735]19:6   [2736]19:6   [2737]19:9   [2738]19:36
   [2739]19:49   [2740]19:164   [2741]19:164   [2742]19:165   [2743]21:4
   [2744]22:16-17   [2745]22:16-18   [2746]22:18   [2747]22:27-28
   [2748]23:6   [2749]24:1   [2750]25:9   [2751]26:4   [2752]27:1
   [2753]27:8   [2754]27:9   [2755]29:1   [2756]30:6   [2757]30:7
   [2758]31:19   [2759]31:19   [2760]31:20   [2761]31:22   [2762]32:9
   [2763]32:9   [2764]32:9   [2765]32:11   [2766]32:17   [2767]32:18
   [2768]33:9   [2769]34:1   [2770]34:1   [2771]34:1   [2772]34:1
   [2773]34:2   [2774]34:2   [2775]34:3   [2776]34:5   [2777]34:5
   [2778]34:5   [2779]34:8   [2780]34:8   [2781]34:11   [2782]34:12
   [2783]34:12   [2784]34:12   [2785]34:12   [2786]34:13
   [2787]34:13-14   [2788]34:14   [2789]34:14   [2790]34:14
   [2791]34:18   [2792]35:5   [2793]35:5   [2794]36:6   [2795]36:6
   [2796]36:9   [2797]36:9   [2798]37:11   [2799]38:6   [2800]39:6
   [2801]39:6   [2802]39:6   [2803]39:7   [2804]39:8   [2805]39:8-10
   [2806]41:4   [2807]41:8   [2808]41:10   [2809]42:5   [2810]43:1
   [2811]43:2   [2812]44:3   [2813]44:9   [2814]44:9   [2815]44:11
   [2816]45:2   [2817]45:10   [2818]45:10   [2819]45:12   [2820]45:13
   [2821]45:13   [2822]46:6   [2823]46:10   [2824]47:2   [2825]47:12-14
   [2826]48:8   [2827]50:23   [2828]51:3   [2829]51:5   [2830]51:8
   [2831]51:9   [2832]52:2   [2833]53:1   [2834]53:5   [2835]55:6
   [2836]55:12-14   [2837]56:1   [2838]56:1   [2839]56:11   [2840]57:7
   [2841]57:11   [2842]57:11   [2843]59:9   [2844]60:11   [2845]60:11
   [2846]62   [2847]62:10   [2848]66:4   [2849]66:9   [2850]68:9
   [2851]68:18   [2852]69:2   [2853]69:22   [2854]72:11   [2855]73:23
   [2856]73:28   [2857]74:7   [2858]74:17   [2859]75:1   [2860]76:1
   [2861]78:24-25   [2862]78:39   [2863]80:7   [2864]82:6   [2865]82:6
   [2866]82:6   [2867]82:6   [2868]82:6   [2869]82:6-7   [2870]82:7
   [2871]82:7   [2872]83:16   [2873]83:18   [2874]84:4   [2875]86:4
   [2876]87:3   [2877]88:5   [2878]90:1   [2879]90:12   [2880]92:5-6
   [2881]94:8   [2882]94:9   [2883]94:12-13   [2884]94:18   [2885]94:18
   [2886]95:5   [2887]95:7   [2888]96:1   [2889]96:5   [2890]103:14
   [2891]103:14   [2892]104:18   [2893]110:3   [2894]126:6
   [2895]139:16   [2896]140:5   [2897]140:5   [2898]141:5   [2899]143:6
   [2900]144:11   [2901]148:8

   Proverbs

   [2902]1:26   [2903]3:12   [2904]3:28   [2905]3:34   [2906]10:10
   [2907]14:26   [2908]20:8-9   [2909]20:27   [2910]22:2   [2911]25:21

   Ecclesiastes

   [2912]1:2-3   [2913]1:14   [2914]7:29   [2915]7:29

   Song of Solomon

   [2916]1:4   [2917]1:7   [2918]1:7   [2919]1:7   [2920]1:8   [2921]1:8
   [2922]2:4   [2923]4:1   [2924]4:8   [2925]8   [2926]8:5

   Isaiah

   [2927]1:2   [2928]1:9   [2929]1:16   [2930]1:18   [2931]1:18
   [2932]2:2   [2933]2:5-21   [2934]3:12   [2935]4:1   [2936]5:6
   [2937]5:6   [2938]5:7   [2939]7:9   [2940]7:9   [2941]7:9   [2942]7:9
   [2943]7:9   [2944]7:9   [2945]7:9   [2946]7:14   [2947]7:14
   [2948]9:6   [2949]11:2   [2950]11:2-3   [2951]11:2-3   [2952]11:2-3
   [2953]22:13   [2954]26:10   [2955]26:10   [2956]26:10   [2957]26:12
   [2958]29:13   [2959]40:6-7   [2960]40:6-7   [2961]40:12   [2962]42:14
   [2963]49:6   [2964]52:11   [2965]52:13-54:5   [2966]52:15
   [2967]53:2   [2968]53:2   [2969]53:8   [2970]54:5   [2971]54:5
   [2972]54:13   [2973]54:13   [2974]57:21   [2975]58:7   [2976]58:7
   [2977]58:7   [2978]59:2   [2979]61:10   [2980]64:4   [2981]65:5
   [2982]65:5   [2983]66:1   [2984]66:1   [2985]66:2

   Jeremiah

   [2986]3:20   [2987]8:11   [2988]12:13   [2989]16:19   [2990]17:5
   [2991]17:14   [2992]17:16   [2993]23:24   [2994]23:24   [2995]27
   [2996]29:7   [2997]32

   Ezekiel

   [2998]3:4   [2999]3:17   [3000]3:19   [3001]9:4   [3002]9:6
   [3003]18:21   [3004]18:21-22   [3005]18:23   [3006]33:7   [3007]33:11

   Daniel

   [3008]4:27

   Hosea

   [3009]6:6

   Joel

   [3010]2:32   [3011]2:32   [3012]2:32

   Amos

   [3013]1:2   [3014]3:8

   Habakkuk

   [3015]2:4   [3016]2:4

   Zechariah

   [3017]1:3   [3018]12:10   [3019]14:4

   Malachi

   [3020]1:6   [3021]4:2   [3022]4:2

   Matthew

   [3023]1   [3024]1:1   [3025]1:1   [3026]1:1   [3027]1:1-16
   [3028]1:2-6   [3029]1:6   [3030]1:7-18   [3031]1:17   [3032]1:18
   [3033]1:18   [3034]1:18   [3035]1:18-25   [3036]1:19   [3037]1:19
   [3038]1:19   [3039]1:19-21   [3040]1:20   [3041]1:20   [3042]1:20
   [3043]1:20-21   [3044]1:21   [3045]1:21   [3046]1:23   [3047]1:23
   [3048]2:1   [3049]2:1-3   [3050]2:1-12   [3051]2:1-18   [3052]2:3-16
   [3053]2:12   [3054]2:13   [3055]2:13-23   [3056]2:14   [3057]2:19-20
   [3058]3:1   [3059]3:1   [3060]3:1-2   [3061]3:1-3   [3062]3:2
   [3063]3:2   [3064]3:2   [3065]3:3-12   [3066]3:4-12   [3067]3:7
   [3068]3:10   [3069]3:11   [3070]3:13   [3071]3:13   [3072]3:13-15
   [3073]3:14   [3074]3:14   [3075]3:15   [3076]3:16   [3077]3:16
   [3078]3:16   [3079]3:16-17   [3080]3:17   [3081]3:17   [3082]4:1-2
   [3083]4:1-11   [3084]4:2   [3085]4:3   [3086]4:4   [3087]4:6
   [3088]4:10   [3089]4:11   [3090]4:11   [3091]4:11   [3092]4:11
   [3093]4:12   [3094]4:12   [3095]4:12   [3096]4:13   [3097]4:13
   [3098]4:13-23   [3099]4:17   [3100]4:17   [3101]4:17   [3102]4:18
   [3103]4:18-22   [3104]4:25   [3105]5   [3106]5   [3107]5:3
   [3108]5:3   [3109]5:3   [3110]5:3-9   [3111]5:4   [3112]5:5
   [3113]5:6   [3114]5:6   [3115]5:6   [3116]5:6   [3117]5:7   [3118]5:7
   [3119]5:8   [3120]5:8   [3121]5:8   [3122]5:8   [3123]5:8   [3124]5:8
   [3125]5:8   [3126]5:9   [3127]5:14-15   [3128]5:14-16   [3129]5:15
   [3130]5:16   [3131]5:16   [3132]5:16   [3133]5:16   [3134]5:16
   [3135]5:17   [3136]5:20   [3137]5:21-22   [3138]5:22   [3139]5:22
   [3140]5:22   [3141]5:22   [3142]5:23-24   [3143]5:25   [3144]5:25
   [3145]5:25-26   [3146]5:26   [3147]5:28   [3148]5:28   [3149]5:28
   [3150]5:34-35   [3151]5:39   [3152]5:40   [3153]5:44   [3154]5:45
   [3155]5:45   [3156]5:45   [3157]6:1   [3158]6:1   [3159]6:2
   [3160]6:2   [3161]6:3   [3162]6:4   [3163]6:4   [3164]6:5-15
   [3165]6:5-15   [3166]6:5-15   [3167]6:7-8   [3168]6:8   [3169]6:9
   [3170]6:9   [3171]6:9   [3172]6:9   [3173]6:9   [3174]6:9   [3175]6:9
   [3176]6:9   [3177]6:9   [3178]6:9-10   [3179]6:10   [3180]6:10
   [3181]6:10   [3182]6:10   [3183]6:10   [3184]6:10   [3185]6:10
   [3186]6:10   [3187]6:11   [3188]6:11   [3189]6:11   [3190]6:11
   [3191]6:11   [3192]6:11-12   [3193]6:12   [3194]6:12   [3195]6:12
   [3196]6:12   [3197]6:12   [3198]6:12   [3199]6:12   [3200]6:12
   [3201]6:12   [3202]6:12   [3203]6:12   [3204]6:13   [3205]6:13
   [3206]6:13   [3207]6:13   [3208]6:13   [3209]6:14   [3210]6:14
   [3211]6:19   [3212]6:19   [3213]6:19-21   [3214]6:20   [3215]6:21
   [3216]6:24   [3217]6:25   [3218]6:33   [3219]6:33   [3220]6:53
   [3221]7   [3222]7:2   [3223]7:3   [3224]7:3   [3225]7:6   [3226]7:7
   [3227]7:7   [3228]7:7   [3229]7:7   [3230]7:7   [3231]7:7-10
   [3232]7:8   [3233]7:11   [3234]7:11   [3235]7:12   [3236]7:13
   [3237]7:13   [3238]7:13-14   [3239]7:15   [3240]7:16   [3241]7:16
   [3242]7:21   [3243]7:21   [3244]7:21   [3245]7:21   [3246]7:22
   [3247]7:22   [3248]7:22   [3249]7:22   [3250]7:23   [3251]7:23
   [3252]7:24   [3253]7:25   [3254]7:25   [3255]7:28   [3256]7:29
   [3257]8:1-2   [3258]8:1-2   [3259]8:5-6   [3260]8:5-13   [3261]8:7
   [3262]8:8   [3263]8:8   [3264]8:8   [3265]8:8   [3266]8:8   [3267]8:9
   [3268]8:10   [3269]8:10   [3270]8:10   [3271]8:11   [3272]8:11
   [3273]8:11   [3274]8:11   [3275]8:11   [3276]8:11   [3277]8:11
   [3278]8:12   [3279]8:14-15   [3280]8:14-15   [3281]8:16
   [3282]8:16-18   [3283]8:18   [3284]8:19-22   [3285]8:20   [3286]8:20
   [3287]8:22   [3288]8:22   [3289]8:22   [3290]8:23   [3291]8:23-34
   [3292]8:23-9:1   [3293]8:24   [3294]8:25   [3295]8:27   [3296]8:27
   [3297]8:29   [3298]9:1-8   [3299]9:6   [3300]9:6   [3301]9:6
   [3302]9:8   [3303]9:9   [3304]9:9   [3305]9:9   [3306]9:10-17
   [3307]9:11   [3308]9:11   [3309]9:12   [3310]9:12   [3311]9:13
   [3312]9:14   [3313]9:18-26   [3314]9:24   [3315]9:27-34   [3316]9:29
   [3317]9:35-10:42   [3318]10:3   [3319]10:3   [3320]10:10
   [3321]10:16   [3322]10:16   [3323]10:16   [3324]10:16   [3325]10:20
   [3326]10:22   [3327]10:23   [3328]10:25   [3329]10:25   [3330]10:28
   [3331]10:28   [3332]10:28   [3333]10:30   [3334]10:40   [3335]11:1-19
   [3336]11:2   [3337]11:3   [3338]11:4-7   [3339]11:4-7   [3340]11:7
   [3341]11:8   [3342]11:9   [3343]11:10   [3344]11:11   [3345]11:12
   [3346]11:15   [3347]11:20-24   [3348]11:20-24   [3349]11:25
   [3350]11:25   [3351]11:25   [3352]11:25   [3353]11:25
   [3354]11:25-27   [3355]11:25-30   [3356]11:27   [3357]11:27
   [3358]11:27   [3359]11:28   [3360]11:28   [3361]11:28   [3362]11:28
   [3363]11:28   [3364]11:28-29   [3365]11:28-29   [3366]11:28-30
   [3367]11:28-30   [3368]11:29   [3369]11:29   [3370]11:30   [3371]12
   [3372]12:1-8   [3373]12:3   [3374]12:9-13   [3375]12:10-12
   [3376]12:13   [3377]12:14-21   [3378]12:22   [3379]12:22-26
   [3380]12:23-37   [3381]12:24-33   [3382]12:27   [3383]12:28
   [3384]12:28   [3385]12:29   [3386]12:29   [3387]12:30   [3388]12:30
   [3389]12:30   [3390]12:30   [3391]12:31   [3392]12:31
   [3393]12:31-32   [3394]12:32   [3395]12:32   [3396]12:33
   [3397]12:33   [3398]12:33   [3399]12:33-34   [3400]12:34
   [3401]12:35   [3402]12:35   [3403]12:38   [3404]12:38
   [3405]12:39-46   [3406]12:40   [3407]12:46-50   [3408]13:1-52
   [3409]13:3   [3410]13:3-8   [3411]13:19   [3412]13:24
   [3413]13:24-25   [3414]13:28   [3415]13:29   [3416]13:30
   [3417]13:30   [3418]13:30   [3419]13:39   [3420]13:52   [3421]13:52
   [3422]13:53-58   [3423]13:54   [3424]14:1-2   [3425]14:1-2
   [3426]14:3-12   [3427]14:13-14   [3428]14:15-21   [3429]14:16
   [3430]14:21   [3431]14:23   [3432]14:23   [3433]14:23-33
   [3434]14:24   [3435]14:25   [3436]14:25   [3437]14:25   [3438]14:26
   [3439]14:26   [3440]14:27   [3441]14:28   [3442]14:28   [3443]14:28
   [3444]14:29   [3445]14:33   [3446]14:34-15:20   [3447]15:8
   [3448]15:21   [3449]15:21   [3450]15:21-28   [3451]15:23-24
   [3452]15:24   [3453]15:24   [3454]15:26   [3455]15:26   [3456]15:26
   [3457]15:26-28   [3458]15:27   [3459]15:27   [3460]15:28
   [3461]15:28   [3462]15:29-38   [3463]15:38   [3464]15:39-16:4
   [3465]16:5-12   [3466]16:6   [3467]16:6   [3468]16:9   [3469]16:12
   [3470]16:13-19   [3471]16:16   [3472]16:16   [3473]16:17
   [3474]16:17   [3475]16:17   [3476]16:18   [3477]16:19   [3478]16:19
   [3479]16:20-23   [3480]16:22   [3481]16:23   [3482]16:23
   [3483]16:23   [3484]16:24-27   [3485]16:26   [3486]16:27
   [3487]16:28   [3488]16:28-17:9   [3489]17:1   [3490]17:1   [3491]17:1
   [3492]17:2   [3493]17:2   [3494]17:2-3   [3495]17:4   [3496]17:5
   [3497]17:5   [3498]17:5   [3499]17:7-8   [3500]17:10-13
   [3501]17:14-20   [3502]17:19   [3503]17:19-20   [3504]17:19-20
   [3505]17:21   [3506]17:21-22   [3507]17:23-27   [3508]18   [3509]18:2
   [3510]18:7   [3511]18:7   [3512]18:8-9   [3513]18:15   [3514]18:15
   [3515]18:15   [3516]18:15-17   [3517]18:16-17   [3518]18:18
   [3519]18:18   [3520]18:18   [3521]18:18   [3522]18:21
   [3523]18:21-22   [3524]18:22   [3525]18:22   [3526]18:22
   [3527]18:23-26   [3528]18:28   [3529]18:31-33   [3530]18:32-33
   [3531]18:35   [3532]18:35   [3533]19:1-12   [3534]19:4   [3535]19:8
   [3536]19:9   [3537]19:9   [3538]19:13-20:16   [3539]19:17
   [3540]19:17   [3541]19:17   [3542]19:17   [3543]19:17   [3544]19:17
   [3545]19:18-19   [3546]19:21   [3547]19:21   [3548]19:21
   [3549]19:21   [3550]19:21   [3551]19:21   [3552]19:23   [3553]19:24
   [3554]19:25   [3555]19:27   [3556]19:28   [3557]20:1   [3558]20:1
   [3559]20:2   [3560]20:4   [3561]20:17-28   [3562]20:22
   [3563]20:29-34   [3564]20:30   [3565]20:30   [3566]20:31
   [3567]20:32-33   [3568]21:1-9   [3569]21:9   [3570]21:9   [3571]21:9
   [3572]21:9   [3573]21:9   [3574]21:10-13   [3575]21:14-22
   [3576]21:17   [3577]21:19   [3578]21:19   [3579]21:19   [3580]21:21
   [3581]21:22   [3582]21:23-27   [3583]21:23-27   [3584]21:28-44
   [3585]21:33   [3586]21:42   [3587]21:44   [3588]21:44
   [3589]21:45-22:14   [3590]22:2   [3591]22:10   [3592]22:11
   [3593]22:11   [3594]22:12   [3595]22:12   [3596]22:13   [3597]22:14
   [3598]22:14   [3599]22:15-33   [3600]22:15-34   [3601]22:18-19
   [3602]22:24   [3603]22:30   [3604]22:30   [3605]22:30
   [3606]22:34-40   [3607]22:37   [3608]22:37-40   [3609]22:37-40
   [3610]22:41-46   [3611]22:42   [3612]22:42   [3613]22:42
   [3614]22:42   [3615]22:42   [3616]22:43-45   [3617]22:43-45
   [3618]22:43-45   [3619]22:49-50   [3620]23   [3621]23   [3622]23:2
   [3623]23:2   [3624]23:2   [3625]23:2   [3626]23:2-3   [3627]23:2-3
   [3628]23:3   [3629]23:3   [3630]23:3   [3631]23:3   [3632]23:3
   [3633]23:3   [3634]23:4   [3635]23:6   [3636]23:23   [3637]23:37
   [3638]23:39   [3639]24:1-2   [3640]24:3-25:46   [3641]24:12
   [3642]24:12   [3643]24:12-13   [3644]24:14   [3645]24:14
   [3646]24:15   [3647]24:16-18   [3648]24:23-25   [3649]24:35
   [3650]24:35   [3651]24:35   [3652]25:1   [3653]25:3   [3654]25:4
   [3655]25:5   [3656]25:6   [3657]25:8   [3658]25:9   [3659]25:9
   [3660]25:10   [3661]25:12   [3662]25:13   [3663]25:21   [3664]25:21
   [3665]25:23   [3666]25:24   [3667]25:24   [3668]25:26   [3669]25:33
   [3670]25:33   [3671]25:33   [3672]25:33-46   [3673]25:34
   [3674]25:34   [3675]25:34   [3676]25:34   [3677]25:34   [3678]25:34
   [3679]25:34   [3680]25:34   [3681]25:34   [3682]25:34   [3683]25:34
   [3684]25:34   [3685]25:34   [3686]25:35   [3687]25:35   [3688]25:35
   [3689]25:40   [3690]25:40   [3691]25:40   [3692]25:40   [3693]25:40
   [3694]25:41   [3695]25:41   [3696]25:41   [3697]25:45   [3698]25:46
   [3699]25:46   [3700]25:46   [3701]26   [3702]26:1-2   [3703]26:2-5
   [3704]26:3-13   [3705]26:3-13   [3706]26:6-13   [3707]26:14
   [3708]26:14-19   [3709]26:17   [3710]26:18   [3711]26:20-25
   [3712]26:22-25   [3713]26:26   [3714]26:28   [3715]26:30-32
   [3716]26:30-35   [3717]26:30-35   [3718]26:33-35   [3719]26:33-35
   [3720]26:34   [3721]26:35   [3722]26:36-46   [3723]26:36-46
   [3724]26:41   [3725]26:47-56   [3726]26:52   [3727]26:52-55
   [3728]26:53   [3729]26:57   [3730]26:57   [3731]26:58
   [3732]26:59-60   [3733]26:59-27:2   [3734]26:61   [3735]26:62-64
   [3736]26:63   [3737]26:65-66   [3738]26:66   [3739]26:67-68
   [3740]26:67-68   [3741]26:68   [3742]26:69   [3743]26:69-74
   [3744]26:75   [3745]26:75   [3746]27   [3747]27:1-2   [3748]27:3-10
   [3749]27:4-5   [3750]27:11-26   [3751]27:19   [3752]27:27-31
   [3753]27:30-31   [3754]27:32   [3755]27:33   [3756]27:34
   [3757]27:35-36   [3758]27:37   [3759]27:38   [3760]27:39-40
   [3761]27:40   [3762]27:40   [3763]27:40   [3764]27:41-43
   [3765]27:42   [3766]27:42   [3767]27:44   [3768]27:45   [3769]27:45
   [3770]27:46-47   [3771]27:48   [3772]27:49   [3773]27:50
   [3774]27:51   [3775]27:51   [3776]27:51-53   [3777]27:54
   [3778]27:55-56   [3779]27:57-58   [3780]27:59-60   [3781]27:61
   [3782]27:62-66   [3783]28:1-7   [3784]28:5-7   [3785]28:5-7
   [3786]28:8   [3787]28:9   [3788]28:9   [3789]28:10   [3790]28:11-15
   [3791]28:16-17   [3792]28:16-20   [3793]28:20   [3794]28:20
   [3795]28:20   [3796]28:20   [3797]28:57   [3798]28:71

   Mark

   [3799]1:1-4   [3800]1:1-21   [3801]1:3   [3802]1:4   [3803]1:6-8
   [3804]1:9   [3805]1:10-11   [3806]1:11   [3807]1:12-13   [3808]1:14
   [3809]1:14   [3810]1:14   [3811]1:16-20   [3812]1:16-20
   [3813]1:16-31   [3814]1:17   [3815]1:22-39   [3816]1:23   [3817]1:24
   [3818]1:31-35   [3819]1:39   [3820]1:39   [3821]1:40
   [3822]1:40-3:12   [3823]2:1-12   [3824]2:9   [3825]2:13-14
   [3826]2:14   [3827]2:15   [3828]2:15-22   [3829]2:16   [3830]2:18
   [3831]2:23-28   [3832]3:1-5   [3833]3:4   [3834]3:7-12
   [3835]3:13-5:20   [3836]3:16-19   [3837]3:17   [3838]3:22
   [3839]3:22-30   [3840]3:28   [3841]3:28-29   [3842]3:28-29
   [3843]3:30   [3844]3:31-35   [3845]4:1-34   [3846]4:31   [3847]4:35
   [3848]4:36   [3849]4:36   [3850]4:38   [3851]4:40   [3852]4:41
   [3853]5:17   [3854]5:21-43   [3855]5:21-6:30   [3856]5:22-43
   [3857]5:34   [3858]5:35   [3859]5:35   [3860]5:36   [3861]5:39
   [3862]5:41   [3863]6:1-6   [3864]6:6-11   [3865]6:8   [3866]6:14
   [3867]6:14-16   [3868]6:14-16   [3869]6:17-29   [3870]6:30-44
   [3871]6:31-7:37   [3872]6:34-44   [3873]6:37   [3874]6:45
   [3875]6:47-54   [3876]7:24-30   [3877]7:31-8:9   [3878]8:1-9:39
   [3879]8:5   [3880]8:6   [3881]8:6   [3882]8:10   [3883]8:10-12
   [3884]8:13-21   [3885]8:22-29   [3886]8:34   [3887]8:34
   [3888]8:34-38   [3889]9:1   [3890]9:10-12   [3891]9:16-28
   [3892]9:24   [3893]9:24   [3894]9:27-33   [3895]9:29-31
   [3896]9:33-49   [3897]9:40-50   [3898]10:1-12:44   [3899]10:9
   [3900]10:12   [3901]10:13-31   [3902]10:37   [3903]10:46-52
   [3904]10:46-52   [3905]11:1-10   [3906]11:11-17   [3907]11:13
   [3908]11:13   [3909]11:13   [3910]11:15-17   [3911]11:20-21
   [3912]12:1-11   [3913]12:12   [3914]12:13-27   [3915]12:29
   [3916]12:35-37   [3917]12:39   [3918]12:41-13:2   [3919]13:4-37
   [3920]13:8   [3921]13:10   [3922]13:14   [3923]13:32   [3924]13:32
   [3925]14   [3926]14:1   [3927]14:1-2   [3928]14:3-9   [3929]14:3-9
   [3930]14:10   [3931]14:10-16   [3932]14:12   [3933]14:17-21
   [3934]14:19-21   [3935]14:22   [3936]14:26-28   [3937]14:26-31
   [3938]14:30   [3939]14:32-42   [3940]14:41   [3941]14:43-50
   [3942]14:52   [3943]14:53   [3944]14:54   [3945]14:55-15:2
   [3946]14:56   [3947]14:57-59   [3948]14:62   [3949]14:62
   [3950]14:64   [3951]14:65   [3952]14:66   [3953]14:68-70
   [3954]14:69   [3955]14:70-72   [3956]14:72   [3957]15   [3958]15:1-2
   [3959]15:2-15   [3960]15:9   [3961]15:13-14   [3962]15:16-20
   [3963]15:20   [3964]15:20-21   [3965]15:23   [3966]15:24
   [3967]15:24   [3968]15:25   [3969]15:25   [3970]15:27
   [3971]15:29-32   [3972]15:31   [3973]15:32   [3974]15:33
   [3975]15:33-36   [3976]15:36   [3977]15:37   [3978]15:38
   [3979]15:39   [3980]15:40-41   [3981]15:42-45   [3982]15:46
   [3983]15:47   [3984]16:2   [3985]16:5   [3986]16:6-7   [3987]16:8
   [3988]16:9-20   [3989]16:12   [3990]16:13   [3991]16:14   [3992]16:14
   [3993]16:15-16   [3994]16:16   [3995]16:17-18   [3996]16:19
   [3997]16:19-20

   Luke

   [3998]1:1   [3999]1:1-4   [4000]1:5   [4001]1:5   [4002]1:5
   [4003]1:5   [4004]1:5-36   [4005]1:5-5:4   [4006]1:26-34   [4007]1:31
   [4008]1:31   [4009]1:32   [4010]1:32   [4011]1:33   [4012]1:36
   [4013]1:36   [4014]1:36   [4015]1:41   [4016]1:57   [4017]1:57-2:21
   [4018]1:63   [4019]2:2   [4020]2:4   [4021]2:7   [4022]2:7
   [4023]2:14   [4024]2:14   [4025]2:14   [4026]2:14   [4027]2:14
   [4028]2:22   [4029]2:22-24   [4030]2:22-39   [4031]2:22-39
   [4032]2:33   [4033]2:33   [4034]2:40   [4035]2:40-41   [4036]2:40-52
   [4037]2:42   [4038]2:42-50   [4039]2:48   [4040]2:48-49
   [4041]2:49-51   [4042]2:52   [4043]3:1-2   [4044]3:1-3   [4045]3:1-21
   [4046]3:2   [4047]3:4   [4048]3:7   [4049]3:7-8   [4050]3:7-17
   [4051]3:15-21   [4052]3:16   [4053]3:17   [4054]3:20   [4055]3:21
   [4056]3:22   [4057]3:22   [4058]3:22   [4059]3:23   [4060]3:23
   [4061]3:23   [4062]3:23-38   [4063]3:31   [4064]4:1-13
   [4065]4:13-14   [4066]4:13-23   [4067]4:14   [4068]4:23
   [4069]4:30-31   [4070]4:31-39   [4071]4:33   [4072]4:34   [4073]4:35
   [4074]4:38-39   [4075]4:40-42   [4076]4:41   [4077]4:41
   [4078]5:1-11   [4079]5:1-11   [4080]5:1-11   [4081]5:2   [4082]5:10
   [4083]5:12-13   [4084]5:17-26   [4085]5:27-28   [4086]5:27-29
   [4087]5:30   [4088]5:32   [4089]5:33   [4090]6:1-5   [4091]6:6-10
   [4092]6:9   [4093]6:12   [4094]6:12-20   [4095]6:13   [4096]6:17
   [4097]6:20   [4098]6:20   [4099]6:22   [4100]6:30   [4101]6:36
   [4102]6:37   [4103]6:37-38   [4104]6:37-38   [4105]6:37-38
   [4106]6:37-38   [4107]6:37-38   [4108]6:44   [4109]6:46
   [4110]7:1-10   [4111]7:2   [4112]7:3-7   [4113]7:12   [4114]7:12
   [4115]7:12   [4116]7:14   [4117]7:14   [4118]7:14-15   [4119]7:18-35
   [4120]7:36   [4121]7:36   [4122]7:36-50   [4123]7:37   [4124]7:41
   [4125]7:42-48   [4126]8:5   [4127]8:19   [4128]8:22   [4129]8:22
   [4130]8:22-37   [4131]8:22-37   [4132]8:24   [4133]8:25
   [4134]8:40-56   [4135]8:41   [4136]8:45   [4137]8:50   [4138]9:1-6
   [4139]9:3   [4140]9:3   [4141]9:7-9   [4142]9:9   [4143]9:10
   [4144]9:10-17   [4145]9:12-17   [4146]9:17-18   [4147]9:18-20
   [4148]9:25-26   [4149]9:28   [4150]9:28   [4151]9:38-45
   [4152]9:44-45   [4153]9:46-48   [4154]9:46-51   [4155]9:49
   [4156]9:50   [4157]9:51-18:14   [4158]9:52-56   [4159]9:57
   [4160]9:57   [4161]9:57   [4162]9:57   [4163]9:58   [4164]9:58
   [4165]9:59   [4166]9:59   [4167]9:60   [4168]9:61   [4169]9:61
   [4170]9:62   [4171]10:1   [4172]10:2   [4173]10:2   [4174]10:2
   [4175]10:3   [4176]10:4   [4177]10:4-6   [4178]10:11   [4179]10:13-15
   [4180]10:15   [4181]10:16   [4182]10:16   [4183]10:16   [4184]10:17
   [4185]10:17   [4186]10:17   [4187]10:20   [4188]10:20   [4189]10:20
   [4190]10:20   [4191]10:21   [4192]10:25-37   [4193]10:29
   [4194]10:30   [4195]10:30   [4196]10:35   [4197]10:36   [4198]10:38
   [4199]10:38   [4200]10:41   [4201]10:41-42   [4202]10:42
   [4203]10:42   [4204]11:3   [4205]11:5   [4206]11:5   [4207]11:5
   [4208]11:11-13   [4209]11:12   [4210]11:14   [4211]11:14-26
   [4212]11:14-13:19   [4213]11:16-37   [4214]11:27   [4215]11:29-39
   [4216]11:37   [4217]11:39   [4218]11:39   [4219]11:40-52
   [4220]11:41   [4221]11:42   [4222]11:52   [4223]12:8-9   [4224]12:10
   [4225]12:10   [4226]12:13   [4227]12:14   [4228]12:15   [4229]12:15
   [4230]12:15   [4231]12:16   [4232]12:16   [4233]12:18-19
   [4234]12:20   [4235]12:20   [4236]12:33   [4237]12:33   [4238]12:33
   [4239]12:35   [4240]12:35   [4241]12:35   [4242]12:35-36
   [4243]12:36   [4244]12:37   [4245]12:47   [4246]12:48   [4247]12:48
   [4248]12:48   [4249]12:49   [4250]12:56   [4251]12:58   [4252]12:58
   [4253]12:58-59   [4254]13:1-5   [4255]13:6   [4256]13:7
   [4257]13:8-9   [4258]13:21   [4259]13:21   [4260]13:23   [4261]13:23
   [4262]13:24   [4263]13:31-35   [4264]13:32   [4265]14:11
   [4266]14:11   [4267]14:11   [4268]14:15   [4269]14:16   [4270]14:16
   [4271]14:16-24   [4272]14:18-20   [4273]14:22-23   [4274]14:26
   [4275]14:26   [4276]15:7   [4277]15:17   [4278]15:18   [4279]16:9
   [4280]16:19   [4281]16:19   [4282]16:22   [4283]16:22-24
   [4284]16:25   [4285]16:29-31   [4286]17:3   [4287]17:3   [4288]17:4
   [4289]17:5   [4290]17:5   [4291]17:5   [4292]17:20   [4293]17:21
   [4294]17:32   [4295]18:1   [4296]18:1   [4297]18:1   [4298]18:1
   [4299]18:1   [4300]18:2   [4301]18:2   [4302]18:2-8   [4303]18:8
   [4304]18:8   [4305]18:9-11   [4306]18:10   [4307]18:10
   [4308]18:10-11   [4309]18:11   [4310]18:11   [4311]18:12
   [4312]18:12   [4313]18:13   [4314]18:13   [4315]18:13   [4316]18:13
   [4317]18:14   [4318]18:14   [4319]18:14   [4320]18:14   [4321]18:16
   [4322]18:18-30   [4323]18:19   [4324]18:31-35   [4325]18:35-43
   [4326]18:35-43   [4327]19:1-38   [4328]19:2   [4329]19:6   [4330]19:8
   [4331]19:9   [4332]19:10   [4333]19:10   [4334]19:21   [4335]19:22-23
   [4336]19:39-40   [4337]19:45-46   [4338]19:47-20:8   [4339]20:2
   [4340]20:9-18   [4341]20:15-17   [4342]20:16-21:6   [4343]20:17-18
   [4344]20:19   [4345]20:20-40   [4346]20:41-44   [4347]21:1-4
   [4348]21:7-36   [4349]21:18   [4350]21:20   [4351]21:21   [4352]21:33
   [4353]21:34-36   [4354]22   [4355]22:1   [4356]22:3-13
   [4357]22:4-12   [4358]22:7   [4359]22:14-23   [4360]22:21
   [4361]22:21-22   [4362]22:24   [4363]22:24-27   [4364]22:24-30
   [4365]22:31   [4366]22:31-32   [4367]22:31-32   [4368]22:31-33
   [4369]22:31-34   [4370]22:31-38   [4371]22:33   [4372]22:33
   [4373]22:39-46   [4374]22:46   [4375]22:49   [4376]22:51
   [4377]22:53   [4378]22:54   [4379]22:54-55   [4380]22:54-58
   [4381]22:59-60   [4382]22:61-62   [4383]22:63-23:1   [4384]23
   [4385]23:2-3   [4386]23:13-14   [4387]23:15-23   [4388]23:16
   [4389]23:18   [4390]23:20-21   [4391]23:22-23   [4392]23:24-25
   [4393]23:26   [4394]23:33   [4395]23:33-43   [4396]23:34
   [4397]23:34   [4398]23:34   [4399]23:34   [4400]23:34   [4401]23:34
   [4402]23:34   [4403]23:34   [4404]23:34   [4405]23:34   [4406]23:34
   [4407]23:34-35   [4408]23:35-37   [4409]23:36-37   [4410]23:39
   [4411]23:40-43   [4412]23:42   [4413]23:44   [4414]23:44-45
   [4415]23:45   [4416]23:46   [4417]23:47   [4418]23:48-49
   [4419]23:50-52   [4420]23:53   [4421]23:54-24:12   [4422]24:5-8
   [4423]24:10-11   [4424]24:12   [4425]24:13-24   [4426]24:15
   [4427]24:28   [4428]24:28   [4429]24:33-34   [4430]24:35
   [4431]24:35   [4432]24:36   [4433]24:36   [4434]24:36-40
   [4435]24:38   [4436]24:38-39   [4437]24:38-40   [4438]24:39
   [4439]24:41   [4440]24:41-43   [4441]24:44   [4442]24:44
   [4443]24:44-49   [4444]24:45   [4445]24:45-47   [4446]24:46
   [4447]24:46   [4448]24:46   [4449]24:46-47   [4450]24:47
   [4451]24:50-51

   John

   [4452]1:1   [4453]1:1   [4454]1:1   [4455]1:1   [4456]1:1   [4457]1:1
   [4458]1:1   [4459]1:1   [4460]1:1   [4461]1:1   [4462]1:1   [4463]1:1
   [4464]1:1   [4465]1:1   [4466]1:1   [4467]1:1   [4468]1:1   [4469]1:1
   [4470]1:1   [4471]1:1   [4472]1:1   [4473]1:1   [4474]1:1   [4475]1:1
   [4476]1:3   [4477]1:3   [4478]1:3   [4479]1:3   [4480]1:3   [4481]1:3
   [4482]1:3   [4483]1:3   [4484]1:3   [4485]1:3   [4486]1:3   [4487]1:4
   [4488]1:5   [4489]1:5-9   [4490]1:6   [4491]1:8   [4492]1:8
   [4493]1:9   [4494]1:9   [4495]1:9   [4496]1:10   [4497]1:10
   [4498]1:10   [4499]1:10   [4500]1:10   [4501]1:11   [4502]1:11-12
   [4503]1:11-14   [4504]1:12   [4505]1:12   [4506]1:12   [4507]1:12
   [4508]1:12   [4509]1:12   [4510]1:12-13   [4511]1:13   [4512]1:14
   [4513]1:14   [4514]1:14   [4515]1:14   [4516]1:14   [4517]1:14
   [4518]1:14   [4519]1:14   [4520]1:14   [4521]1:14   [4522]1:14
   [4523]1:14   [4524]1:14   [4525]1:14   [4526]1:14   [4527]1:15
   [4528]1:16   [4529]1:16   [4530]1:16   [4531]1:19-27   [4532]1:23
   [4533]1:23   [4534]1:27   [4535]1:29   [4536]1:29   [4537]1:32-34
   [4538]1:33   [4539]1:33   [4540]1:35-44   [4541]1:35-44   [4542]1:39
   [4543]1:42   [4544]1:42   [4545]1:42   [4546]1:42   [4547]1:47
   [4548]1:47   [4549]1:48   [4550]1:48   [4551]1:48   [4552]1:48
   [4553]1:49   [4554]1:50   [4555]1:50   [4556]1:50-51   [4557]1:51
   [4558]1:51   [4559]2:1   [4560]2:1-2   [4561]2:1-11   [4562]2:1-11
   [4563]2:1-17   [4564]2:2   [4565]2:4   [4566]2:9   [4567]2:11
   [4568]2:12   [4569]2:12   [4570]2:12-22   [4571]2:13   [4572]2:19
   [4573]2:19   [4574]2:24-25   [4575]2:25   [4576]3:3   [4577]3:5
   [4578]3:5   [4579]3:5   [4580]3:8   [4581]3:13   [4582]3:13
   [4583]3:13   [4584]3:17   [4585]3:21   [4586]3:22-24   [4587]3:22-24
   [4588]3:34   [4589]4:1   [4590]4:1-3   [4591]4:3   [4592]4:5
   [4593]4:7   [4594]4:13   [4595]4:13   [4596]4:14   [4597]4:24
   [4598]4:25-26   [4599]4:27   [4600]4:34   [4601]4:34   [4602]4:34
   [4603]4:35   [4604]4:38   [4605]4:43-54   [4606]4:48   [4607]5
   [4608]5   [4609]5   [4610]5:2   [4611]5:2   [4612]5:7   [4613]5:8-9
   [4614]5:17   [4615]5:17   [4616]5:17   [4617]5:17   [4618]5:18
   [4619]5:18   [4620]5:19   [4621]5:19   [4622]5:19   [4623]5:19
   [4624]5:19   [4625]5:19   [4626]5:20   [4627]5:21   [4628]5:21
   [4629]5:22   [4630]5:24-26   [4631]5:25   [4632]5:25   [4633]5:28
   [4634]5:28-29   [4635]5:29   [4636]5:29   [4637]5:30   [4638]5:31
   [4639]5:31   [4640]5:33   [4641]5:33   [4642]5:35   [4643]5:35
   [4644]5:35   [4645]5:39   [4646]5:39   [4647]5:43   [4648]5:43
   [4649]5:44   [4650]5:45-47   [4651]5:46   [4652]5:46   [4653]6:1
   [4654]6:5-6   [4655]6:5-13   [4656]6:6   [4657]6:7   [4658]6:9
   [4659]6:15   [4660]6:15-21   [4661]6:22-72   [4662]6:26-27
   [4663]6:27   [4664]6:32-64   [4665]6:35   [4666]6:38   [4667]6:38
   [4668]6:41   [4669]6:41   [4670]6:41   [4671]6:41   [4672]6:42
   [4673]6:44   [4674]6:45   [4675]6:45   [4676]6:51   [4677]6:51
   [4678]6:51   [4679]6:53   [4680]6:53   [4681]6:55   [4682]6:55
   [4683]6:56   [4684]6:56   [4685]6:60   [4686]6:61-62   [4687]6:63
   [4688]6:63-64   [4689]6:65   [4690]7:2   [4691]7:3-4   [4692]7:5
   [4693]7:6   [4694]7:6-7   [4695]7:6-8   [4696]7:8   [4697]7:9-10
   [4698]7:10   [4699]7:12   [4700]7:17   [4701]7:20   [4702]7:25-26
   [4703]7:28   [4704]7:28   [4705]7:34   [4706]7:36   [4707]8:11
   [4708]8:12   [4709]8:12   [4710]8:25   [4711]8:31   [4712]8:31
   [4713]8:31-37   [4714]8:32   [4715]8:33   [4716]8:34   [4717]8:36
   [4718]8:39-40   [4719]8:44   [4720]8:48   [4721]8:48   [4722]8:56
   [4723]8:58   [4724]9   [4725]9:2   [4726]9:3   [4727]9:4   [4728]9:4
   [4729]9:7   [4730]9:7   [4731]9:16   [4732]9:16   [4733]9:24
   [4734]9:31   [4735]9:31   [4736]9:35-36   [4737]9:35-36   [4738]9:37
   [4739]9:37-38   [4740]9:39   [4741]9:39   [4742]10   [4743]10
   [4744]10:1   [4745]10:1   [4746]10:2   [4747]10:7   [4748]10:7
   [4749]10:11   [4750]10:11   [4751]10:11   [4752]10:12-13
   [4753]10:12-13   [4754]10:12-13   [4755]10:14   [4756]10:15
   [4757]10:16   [4758]10:16   [4759]10:16   [4760]10:16   [4761]10:16
   [4762]10:18   [4763]10:18   [4764]10:24   [4765]10:30   [4766]10:30
   [4767]10:30   [4768]10:30   [4769]10:30   [4770]10:30   [4771]10:30
   [4772]10:30   [4773]11   [4774]11   [4775]11:1-2   [4776]11:11
   [4777]11:17   [4778]11:25-26   [4779]11:33-44   [4780]11:38
   [4781]11:39   [4782]11:39   [4783]11:43   [4784]11:43   [4785]11:44
   [4786]11:44   [4787]11:49-51   [4788]11:55   [4789]11:55   [4790]12:1
   [4791]12:1   [4792]12:1-2   [4793]12:1-8   [4794]12:1-9   [4795]12:3
   [4796]12:6   [4797]12:14-15   [4798]12:20-50   [4799]12:20-50
   [4800]12:25   [4801]12:31   [4802]12:31   [4803]12:31
   [4804]12:37-38   [4805]12:44   [4806]12:44   [4807]12:46
   [4808]12:49-50   [4809]12:50   [4810]13   [4811]13:1   [4812]13:1
   [4813]13:1   [4814]13:2   [4815]13:2   [4816]13:5   [4817]13:10
   [4818]13:21-22   [4819]13:21-27   [4820]13:23   [4821]13:23
   [4822]13:23   [4823]13:23   [4824]13:23-27   [4825]13:25
   [4826]13:27-30   [4827]13:28-32   [4828]13:33-36   [4829]13:33-38
   [4830]13:34   [4831]13:34   [4832]13:37   [4833]13:37-38   [4834]14
   [4835]14:1-2   [4836]14:6   [4837]14:6   [4838]14:6   [4839]14:6
   [4840]14:6   [4841]14:6   [4842]14:6   [4843]14:6   [4844]14:8
   [4845]14:8   [4846]14:8   [4847]14:8   [4848]14:8   [4849]14:9
   [4850]14:9   [4851]14:9   [4852]14:9   [4853]14:9-10   [4854]14:10
   [4855]14:10   [4856]14:10   [4857]14:10   [4858]14:12   [4859]14:21
   [4860]14:21   [4861]14:21   [4862]14:21   [4863]14:21   [4864]14:21
   [4865]14:26   [4866]14:26   [4867]14:28   [4868]14:30   [4869]14:30
   [4870]14:30   [4871]14:30   [4872]14:30   [4873]15:1   [4874]15:1
   [4875]15:2   [4876]15:5   [4877]15:5   [4878]15:5   [4879]15:5
   [4880]15:5   [4881]15:6   [4882]15:16   [4883]15:18   [4884]15:22
   [4885]15:22   [4886]15:22   [4887]15:24   [4888]15:24   [4889]15:26
   [4890]15:26   [4891]16:7   [4892]16:7   [4893]16:7-11   [4894]16:8
   [4895]16:8   [4896]16:8-9   [4897]16:9-11   [4898]16:12   [4899]16:13
   [4900]16:15   [4901]16:15   [4902]16:24   [4903]16:24   [4904]16:24
   [4905]16:24   [4906]16:33   [4907]16:33   [4908]17:3   [4909]17:10
   [4910]17:22   [4911]17:22   [4912]17:24   [4913]17:25-26   [4914]18
   [4915]18:1   [4916]18:3   [4917]18:4-9   [4918]18:11   [4919]18:12
   [4920]18:13   [4921]18:15-18   [4922]18:17   [4923]18:18
   [4924]18:19-23   [4925]18:19-24   [4926]18:23   [4927]18:24
   [4928]18:25   [4929]18:26-27   [4930]18:28   [4931]18:28
   [4932]18:28-30   [4933]18:29-31   [4934]18:31-34   [4935]18:35-37
   [4936]18:36   [4937]18:36-37   [4938]18:37-19:7   [4939]19
   [4940]19:1-3   [4941]19:2-16   [4942]19:4-5   [4943]19:6
   [4944]19:6-12   [4945]19:8-12   [4946]19:12-14   [4947]19:13-16
   [4948]19:13-16   [4949]19:15   [4950]19:15-16   [4951]19:16-18
   [4952]19:18   [4953]19:19-22   [4954]19:23   [4955]19:23-24
   [4956]19:25-27   [4957]19:28-29   [4958]19:30   [4959]19:31
   [4960]19:37   [4961]19:38   [4962]19:39   [4963]19:40-42
   [4964]19:41   [4965]20:1-18   [4966]20:9-10   [4967]20:13
   [4968]20:13-18   [4969]20:14   [4970]20:17   [4971]20:17
   [4972]20:18   [4973]20:19-20   [4974]20:19-24   [4975]20:20-23
   [4976]20:22   [4977]20:22   [4978]20:22   [4979]20:22-23
   [4980]20:22-23   [4981]20:23   [4982]20:23   [4983]20:25
   [4984]20:26   [4985]20:26-29   [4986]20:27   [4987]20:28
   [4988]20:29   [4989]20:29   [4990]20:29   [4991]21:1   [4992]21:1-11
   [4993]21:3   [4994]21:14   [4995]21:15   [4996]21:15   [4997]21:15
   [4998]21:15   [4999]21:15   [5000]21:15-17   [5001]21:16
   [5002]21:16   [5003]21:17   [5004]21:18   [5005]21:19   [5006]21:23
   [5007]21:24   [5008]21:25   [5009]21:25   [5010]21:25

   Acts

   [5011]1:1-2   [5012]1:2-9   [5013]1:3   [5014]1:3   [5015]1:3
   [5016]1:4-8   [5017]1:5   [5018]1:7   [5019]1:11   [5020]1:15
   [5021]1:15   [5022]1:15   [5023]1:25   [5024]1:26   [5025]2:1-4
   [5026]2:3   [5027]2:3   [5028]2:4   [5029]2:4   [5030]2:37
   [5031]2:37-38   [5032]2:38   [5033]3   [5034]4   [5035]4:26-27
   [5036]4:32   [5037]4:32   [5038]4:32   [5039]4:32   [5040]4:32
   [5041]7:6   [5042]7:51-52   [5043]7:58   [5044]7:59   [5045]7:60
   [5046]7:60   [5047]7:60   [5048]8:5   [5049]8:13   [5050]8:14
   [5051]8:17   [5052]8:19-21   [5053]8:28   [5054]8:29   [5055]8:36
   [5056]9:1   [5057]9:1-30   [5058]9:4   [5059]9:4   [5060]9:4
   [5061]9:4   [5062]9:4   [5063]9:4   [5064]9:4   [5065]9:15
   [5066]10:13   [5067]10:25   [5068]10:41   [5069]10:44
   [5070]11:27-30   [5071]13:46   [5072]13:46   [5073]14:22   [5074]15:9
   [5075]15:9   [5076]15:9   [5077]17:18   [5078]17:28   [5079]18:2-3
   [5080]19:34   [5081]20:34   [5082]22:3   [5083]22:25   [5084]23:3-5
   [5085]23:8   [5086]24:25   [5087]28:10

   Romans

   [5088]1:1   [5089]1:3   [5090]1:3   [5091]1:3   [5092]1:4   [5093]1:9
   [5094]1:17   [5095]1:17   [5096]1:18   [5097]1:18   [5098]1:19
   [5099]1:19   [5100]1:20   [5101]1:20   [5102]1:20   [5103]1:20
   [5104]1:21   [5105]1:21   [5106]1:22   [5107]1:22   [5108]1:22-23
   [5109]1:23   [5110]1:24   [5111]1:24-28   [5112]2:1   [5113]2:4
   [5114]2:4-6   [5115]2:13   [5116]2:14   [5117]2:14-16   [5118]2:21
   [5119]3:3   [5120]3:4   [5121]3:4   [5122]3:8   [5123]3:20-21
   [5124]3:21   [5125]3:23   [5126]3:23   [5127]3:23   [5128]4:4
   [5129]4:15   [5130]4:17   [5131]4:25   [5132]4:25   [5133]5:3-5
   [5134]5:3-5   [5135]5:5   [5136]5:5   [5137]5:5   [5138]5:5
   [5139]5:5   [5140]5:5   [5141]5:6   [5142]5:6   [5143]5:10
   [5144]5:12   [5145]5:12   [5146]5:20   [5147]5:20   [5148]5:20
   [5149]5:20   [5150]6:9   [5151]6:9   [5152]6:9   [5153]6:12
   [5154]6:12   [5155]6:12   [5156]7:2-3   [5157]7:7   [5158]7:7
   [5159]7:7   [5160]7:8   [5161]7:11   [5162]7:12   [5163]7:13
   [5164]7:13   [5165]7:17   [5166]7:18   [5167]7:19   [5168]7:22
   [5169]7:22   [5170]7:22   [5171]7:22-23   [5172]7:23   [5173]7:23
   [5174]7:23-24   [5175]7:24   [5176]7:24-25   [5177]7:24-25
   [5178]7:24-25   [5179]7:24-25   [5180]7:25   [5181]7:25   [5182]8:3
   [5183]8:3   [5184]8:3   [5185]8:3   [5186]8:4   [5187]8:9
   [5188]8:10-11   [5189]8:13   [5190]8:13   [5191]8:15   [5192]8:15
   [5193]8:15   [5194]8:15-23   [5195]8:16   [5196]8:17   [5197]8:18
   [5198]8:23   [5199]8:24   [5200]8:24   [5201]8:24-25   [5202]8:29
   [5203]8:32   [5204]8:32   [5205]8:34   [5206]8:35   [5207]8:37
   [5208]9:3   [5209]9:5   [5210]9:5   [5211]9:14   [5212]9:20
   [5213]9:21   [5214]9:33   [5215]10:2   [5216]10:2   [5217]10:2-3
   [5218]10:3   [5219]10:3   [5220]10:3   [5221]10:6   [5222]10:13
   [5223]10:13   [5224]10:13   [5225]10:14   [5226]10:14   [5227]10:14
   [5228]10:14-15   [5229]10:16   [5230]10:17   [5231]11:1   [5232]11:3
   [5233]11:5-6   [5234]11:5-6   [5235]11:17   [5236]11:17-24
   [5237]11:20   [5238]11:20   [5239]11:25   [5240]11:25   [5241]11:34
   [5242]11:34   [5243]11:35   [5244]12:3   [5245]12:11   [5246]12:14
   [5247]12:14   [5248]12:16   [5249]12:17   [5250]12:21   [5251]13:1-2
   [5252]13:10   [5253]13:10   [5254]13:10   [5255]14:3-4   [5256]14:6
   [5257]15:1   [5258]15:16   [5259]15:20   [5260]15:21   [5261]15:33

   1 Corinthians

   [5262]1:1   [5263]1:10   [5264]1:10   [5265]1:12   [5266]1:12-13
   [5267]1:13   [5268]1:13   [5269]1:20   [5270]1:23-24   [5271]1:24
   [5272]1:27-28   [5273]1:27-28   [5274]2:8   [5275]2:8   [5276]2:8
   [5277]2:9   [5278]2:9   [5279]2:9   [5280]2:9   [5281]2:11
   [5282]2:14   [5283]2:15   [5284]3:1-2   [5285]3:1-3   [5286]3:4-5
   [5287]3:6   [5288]3:7   [5289]3:7   [5290]3:7   [5291]3:11
   [5292]3:16   [5293]3:16   [5294]3:16-17   [5295]3:17   [5296]3:17
   [5297]3:17   [5298]3:18   [5299]4:3   [5300]4:3-4   [5301]4:5
   [5302]4:5   [5303]4:7   [5304]4:7   [5305]4:7   [5306]4:7   [5307]4:9
   [5308]4:11   [5309]4:12-13   [5310]4:12-13   [5311]4:16   [5312]4:16
   [5313]4:16   [5314]4:17   [5315]4:21   [5316]5:5   [5317]5:12
   [5318]5:12   [5319]6:9   [5320]6:17   [5321]6:19   [5322]6:19
   [5323]6:20   [5324]7:4   [5325]7:5   [5326]7:6   [5327]7:10-11
   [5328]7:11   [5329]7:14   [5330]7:14-15   [5331]7:29   [5332]7:29
   [5333]7:29-32   [5334]7:35   [5335]8:1   [5336]8:10   [5337]8:10
   [5338]8:10-11   [5339]8:12   [5340]8:12   [5341]9:7   [5342]9:11
   [5343]9:11-12   [5344]9:13-15   [5345]9:13-17   [5346]9:19-22
   [5347]9:26-27   [5348]9:26-27   [5349]10:4   [5350]10:4   [5351]10:4
   [5352]10:12   [5353]10:12   [5354]10:13   [5355]10:13   [5356]10:17
   [5357]10:20   [5358]10:20   [5359]10:24   [5360]10:32-33
   [5361]10:33   [5362]10:33   [5363]10:33   [5364]10:33   [5365]11:1
   [5366]11:1   [5367]11:1   [5368]11:3   [5369]11:3   [5370]11:3
   [5371]11:3   [5372]11:19   [5373]11:26   [5374]11:29   [5375]11:29
   [5376]11:29   [5377]11:29   [5378]12:3   [5379]12:8   [5380]12:11
   [5381]12:11   [5382]12:12   [5383]12:12   [5384]12:27   [5385]12:27
   [5386]12:27   [5387]12:29   [5388]12:31   [5389]13:1   [5390]13:1
   [5391]13:1   [5392]13:1   [5393]13:1   [5394]13:1   [5395]13:1-3
   [5396]13:1-3   [5397]13:3   [5398]13:4   [5399]13:5   [5400]13:5
   [5401]13:6   [5402]13:8   [5403]13:9   [5404]13:10   [5405]13:12
   [5406]13:12   [5407]13:12   [5408]13:12   [5409]13:12   [5410]13:12
   [5411]13:12   [5412]13:13   [5413]14:15   [5414]14:20   [5415]15:3-8
   [5416]15:4-5   [5417]15:6   [5418]15:6   [5419]15:6   [5420]15:9
   [5421]15:9   [5422]15:9   [5423]15:9   [5424]15:9   [5425]15:9
   [5426]15:10   [5427]15:22   [5428]15:22   [5429]15:25   [5430]15:28
   [5431]15:31   [5432]15:32   [5433]15:33   [5434]15:41-42
   [5435]15:42   [5436]15:43   [5437]15:52   [5438]15:53
   [5439]15:53-54   [5440]15:54   [5441]15:54-55   [5442]15:55
   [5443]16:1-8

   2 Corinthians

   [5444]1:12   [5445]1:12   [5446]1:12   [5447]1:19   [5448]2:16
   [5449]3:5   [5450]3:6   [5451]3:13   [5452]3:15   [5453]3:16
   [5454]3:16   [5455]3:16   [5456]3:18   [5457]4:2   [5458]4:3
   [5459]4:7   [5460]4:7   [5461]4:16   [5462]4:18   [5463]5:3
   [5464]5:3   [5465]5:6   [5466]5:6   [5467]5:6   [5468]5:6-7
   [5469]5:6-7   [5470]5:6-7   [5471]5:6-7   [5472]5:10   [5473]5:10
   [5474]5:16   [5475]5:16   [5476]5:17   [5477]5:19   [5478]5:19
   [5479]5:19   [5480]5:21   [5481]5:21   [5482]5:21   [5483]6:4
   [5484]6:10   [5485]6:13-14   [5486]7:10   [5487]8:9   [5488]8:21
   [5489]9:7   [5490]11:2   [5491]11:2   [5492]11:2-3   [5493]11:3
   [5494]11:3   [5495]11:12   [5496]11:20-21   [5497]11:23-27
   [5498]11:24   [5499]11:31   [5500]12:2-4   [5501]12:2-4   [5502]12:4
   [5503]12:7-8   [5504]12:9   [5505]12:14   [5506]12:15   [5507]13:3
   [5508]13:3   [5509]13:3   [5510]13:4

   Galatians

   [5511]1:9   [5512]1:10   [5513]1:10   [5514]1:10   [5515]1:18
   [5516]1:20   [5517]1:22   [5518]1:22-24   [5519]1:23-24   [5520]2:1
   [5521]2:4   [5522]2:20   [5523]2:21   [5524]3:1   [5525]3:13
   [5526]3:16   [5527]3:16   [5528]3:16   [5529]3:16   [5530]3:21
   [5531]3:21-22   [5532]3:22   [5533]3:28   [5534]3:29   [5535]3:29
   [5536]3:29   [5537]4   [5538]4:1-6   [5539]4:4   [5540]4:4
   [5541]4:4-5   [5542]4:4-5   [5543]4:4-5   [5544]4:5   [5545]4:6
   [5546]4:6   [5547]4:6   [5548]4:13-14   [5549]4:22   [5550]4:29
   [5551]5:6   [5552]5:6   [5553]5:6   [5554]5:6   [5555]5:6
   [5556]5:13   [5557]5:14   [5558]5:14   [5559]5:15-16   [5560]5:16
   [5561]5:17   [5562]5:17   [5563]5:17   [5564]5:17   [5565]5:19-23
   [5566]5:22   [5567]5:26   [5568]6   [5569]6:1-2   [5570]6:2
   [5571]6:2-5   [5572]6:2-5   [5573]6:3   [5574]6:4   [5575]6:4
   [5576]6:14   [5577]6:14   [5578]6:14   [5579]6:14

   Ephesians

   [5580]1:5   [5581]1:5   [5582]1:18   [5583]1:22-23   [5584]2:2
   [5585]2:2   [5586]2:3   [5587]2:8   [5588]2:11-22   [5589]2:14
   [5590]2:14   [5591]2:20   [5592]3:14   [5593]3:17   [5594]3:17
   [5595]3:17   [5596]3:17   [5597]3:17   [5598]3:17-19   [5599]3:1719
   [5600]4:3   [5601]4:3   [5602]4:8   [5603]4:14   [5604]4:22-24
   [5605]4:26   [5606]4:26   [5607]4:26-27   [5608]4:27   [5609]4:28
   [5610]4:32   [5611]4:32   [5612]5:1   [5613]5:5   [5614]5:8
   [5615]5:8   [5616]5:11   [5617]5:13   [5618]5:14   [5619]5:14
   [5620]5:14   [5621]5:16   [5622]5:16   [5623]5:23   [5624]5:23
   [5625]5:23   [5626]5:25   [5627]5:25-33   [5628]5:27   [5629]5:31
   [5630]5:31-32   [5631]6:2   [5632]6:5   [5633]6:12   [5634]6:16

   Philippians

   [5635]1:16-18   [5636]1:18   [5637]1:18   [5638]1:18-19   [5639]2:1
   [5640]2:2-3   [5641]2:3   [5642]2:6   [5643]2:6   [5644]2:6
   [5645]2:6   [5646]2:6   [5647]2:6   [5648]2:6   [5649]2:6   [5650]2:6
   [5651]2:6-7   [5652]2:6-7   [5653]2:7   [5654]2:7   [5655]2:7
   [5656]2:7   [5657]2:7   [5658]2:7-8   [5659]2:8   [5660]2:8
   [5661]2:9   [5662]2:9   [5663]2:12   [5664]2:13   [5665]2:15
   [5666]2:20   [5667]2:21   [5668]2:21   [5669]2:21   [5670]2:21
   [5671]2:21   [5672]2:21   [5673]2:21   [5674]3:1   [5675]3:5
   [5676]3:8-9   [5677]3:12   [5678]3:12   [5679]3:13   [5680]3:13
   [5681]3:13-14   [5682]3:19   [5683]3:20   [5684]3:20   [5685]3:21
   [5686]4:7   [5687]4:17

   Colossians

   [5688]1:13   [5689]1:13   [5690]1:24   [5691]1:24   [5692]2:3
   [5693]2:3   [5694]2:6-7   [5695]2:16-17   [5696]3:1   [5697]3:1-2
   [5698]3:1-3   [5699]3:4   [5700]3:5   [5701]3:5   [5702]3:9
   [5703]3:11   [5704]3:13   [5705]3:13   [5706]3:14   [5707]3:15

   1 Thessalonians

   [5708]2:9   [5709]2:9   [5710]3:8   [5711]4:4   [5712]4:13   [5713]5:2

   2 Thessalonians

   [5714]3:2   [5715]3:8   [5716]3:14-15

   1 Timothy

   [5717]1:5   [5718]1:5   [5719]1:7   [5720]1:13   [5721]2:1-2
   [5722]2:5   [5723]2:5   [5724]2:5   [5725]5:6   [5726]5:17
   [5727]5:20   [5728]5:20   [5729]5:24-25   [5730]6:6   [5731]6:7
   [5732]6:7   [5733]6:7-8   [5734]6:8   [5735]6:8-10   [5736]6:9
   [5737]6:10   [5738]6:10   [5739]6:10   [5740]6:16   [5741]6:17
   [5742]6:17   [5743]6:18   [5744]6:18   [5745]6:19

   2 Timothy

   [5746]2:8   [5747]2:19   [5748]2:21   [5749]2:24   [5750]2:24
   [5751]2:24-25   [5752]2:25-26   [5753]3:2   [5754]3:5   [5755]3:12
   [5756]4:2   [5757]4:14   [5758]4:14-16

   Titus

   [5759]2:9

   Hebrews

   [5760]1   [5761]3:13   [5762]3:13   [5763]7:27   [5764]11
   [5765]11:33   [5766]11:37   [5767]12:6   [5768]12:7   [5769]12:8
   [5770]12:9   [5771]12:14   [5772]13:2   [5773]13:4   [5774]13:17

   James

   [5775]1:10   [5776]1:13   [5777]1:13   [5778]1:13   [5779]1:13
   [5780]1:14-15   [5781]1:18   [5782]1:22   [5783]2:13   [5784]2:19
   [5785]2:19   [5786]2:19   [5787]2:19   [5788]3:8   [5789]4:4
   [5790]4:6   [5791]4:6   [5792]4:6   [5793]4:6   [5794]4:14

   1 Peter

   [5795]1:24   [5796]1:24-25   [5797]1:24-25   [5798]2:21
   [5799]2:21-22   [5800]2:22   [5801]3:19   [5802]3:20   [5803]3:20-21
   [5804]4:6   [5805]4:8   [5806]4:17-18   [5807]5:8

   2 Peter

   [5808]1:19

   1 John

   [5809]1:8   [5810]1:8   [5811]1:8   [5812]1:8   [5813]1:8   [5814]1:9
   [5815]1:9   [5816]1:9   [5817]2:9   [5818]2:15   [5819]2:15
   [5820]2:15   [5821]2:15-16   [5822]2:18   [5823]2:18   [5824]2:19
   [5825]3:2   [5826]3:2   [5827]3:2   [5828]3:2   [5829]3:2   [5830]3:9
   [5831]3:15   [5832]3:15   [5833]3:24   [5834]5:14   [5835]5:16
   [5836]5:20   [5837]5:20

   Jude

   [5838]1:19

   Revelation

   [5839]1:4   [5840]4:6-7   [5841]4:7   [5842]4:7   [5843]5:5
   [5844]5:5   [5845]6:10   [5846]7:9   [5847]12:9   [5848]17:15
   [5849]22:4

   Tobit

   [5850]2:14   [5851]4:10

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [5852]1   [5853]1:1   [5854]1:1   [5855]1:1   [5856]1:5   [5857]1:9
   [5858]1:11   [5859]1:11   [5860]1:11   [5861]3:6   [5862]4:20
   [5863]5:6   [5864]5:6   [5865]5:8-9   [5866]7:26   [5867]7:26
   [5868]7:26   [5869]8:1   [5870]8:1   [5871]9:13   [5872]9:15
   [5873]9:15   [5874]13:9

   Susanna

   [5875]1:19-22

   2 Maccabees

   [5876]7:22

   Sirach

   [5877]2:10   [5878]2:12   [5879]3:18   [5880]3:30   [5881]5:4
   [5882]5:5-6   [5883]5:7   [5884]6:37   [5885]9:13   [5886]10:9
   [5887]10:12   [5888]10:13   [5889]10:13   [5890]10:13   [5891]14:18
   [5892]17:28   [5893]19:4   [5894]21:1   [5895]22:12   [5896]24:3
   [5897]27:5   [5898]29:12   [5899]29:12   [5900]29:27   [5901]30:23
   [5902]30:23   [5903]34:9   [5904]34:11
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Matthew

   [5905]3:13   [5906]5   [5907]5:3   [5908]5:8   [5909]5:16
   [5910]5:22   [5911]6   [5912]6:5-15   [5913]6:5-15   [5914]6:5-15
   [5915]6:9   [5916]6:9   [5917]6:9   [5918]6:19   [5919]7:7
   [5920]8:8   [5921]8:23   [5922]10:16   [5923]10:28   [5924]11:2
   [5925]11:25   [5926]11:25   [5927]12:19   [5928]12:32   [5929]12:33
   [5930]13:52   [5931]14:24   [5932]14:25   [5933]15:21   [5934]17
   [5935]17:1   [5936]17:19   [5937]17:21   [5938]18:7   [5939]18:15
   [5940]19:17   [5941]19:17   [5942]19:21   [5943]19:28   [5944]20:1
   [5945]20:30   [5946]21:19   [5947]22:2   [5948]22:42   [5949]22:42
   [5950]25:1   [5951]25:25

   Mark

   [5952]8:5   [5953]8:32   [5954]8:34

   Luke

   [5955]7:2   [5956]7:37   [5957]9:57   [5958]10:2   [5959]10:16
   [5960]10:38   [5961]10:38   [5962]11:5   [5963]11:39   [5964]12:15
   [5965]12:35   [5966]12:56   [5967]12:58   [5968]13:6   [5969]13:21
   [5970]13:23   [5971]14:16   [5972]16:9   [5973]17:3   [5974]18:1
   [5975]24:28   [5976]24:36

   John

   [5977]1:1   [5978]1:1   [5979]1:1   [5980]1:1   [5981]1:10
   [5982]1:48   [5983]2:2   [5984]5:2   [5985]5:2   [5986]5:19
   [5987]5:25   [5988]5:31   [5989]5:39   [5990]6:9   [5991]6:53
   [5992]6:55   [5993]7:6   [5994]8:31   [5995]9:4   [5996]9:31
   [5997]9:31   [5998]10   [5999]10:14   [6000]10:30   [6001]12:44
   [6002]14:6   [6003]14:6   [6004]14:7   [6005]14:8   [6006]16:24
   [6007]21:15   [6008]21:16

   1 Corinthians

   [6009]2:9
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * angareuo: [6010]1
     * apo tou ponerou: [6011]1
     * aphekamen: [6012]1
     * hamartematos: [6013]1
     * epiousios: [6014]1
     * helikia: [6015]1
     * othoniois: [6016]1
     * hupostasis: [6017]1
     * Libanou: [6018]1
     * balanou: [6019]1
     * battalogeo: [6020]1
     * eusebeia: [6021]1
     * theosebeia: [6022]1
     * nous: [6023]1
     * ourano: [6024]1
     * oupo: [6025]1
     * houtos: [6026]1
     * parelthon: [6027]1
     * penthountes: [6028]1
     * skepasmata: [6029]1
     * to oros: [6030]1
     * ton modion: [6031]1
     * trichinas: [6032]1
     * chrisma: [6033]1
     * agron: [6034]1
     * arche: [6035]1
     * aphiemen: [6036]1
     * aphanizousi...phanosi: [6037]1 [6038]2
     * anthropos: [6039]1
     * HaArmonia: [6040]1
     * epibalon: [6041]1
     * esesthe teleioi: [6042]1
     * elegen: [6043]1 [6044]2
     * elegon: [6045]1
     * he tou Pneumatos blasphemia: [6046]1
     * elthon: [6047]1
     * himation: [6048]1 [6049]2
     * homologeso: [6050]1
     * hupselon kai meteoron: [6051]1
     * husteron: [6052]1
     * rhakos: [6053]1 [6054]2
     * ?aolelumenen: [6055]1
     * Ne ten kauchesin humeteran: [6056]1
     * Chronos: [6057]1
     * aigis: [6058]1
     * aix: [6059]1
     * aition: [6060]1
     * battologeo: [6061]1
     * eike: [6062]1 [6063]2
     * eis: [6064]1
     * eis to telos: [6065]1
     * threskeia: [6066]1
     * kai epi pan dendron balanou Basan: [6067]1
     * kriseos: [6068]1
     * krisis: [6069]1 [6070]2
     * legousin auto: [6071]1
     * latreia: [6072]1
     * merimnao: [6073]1
     * meteoron: [6074]1
     * metabe: [6075]1
     * ne tnn kauchesin: [6076]1
     * nous: [6077]1
     * ouk: [6078]1
     * pases: [6079]1
     * pases: [6080]1
     * peiraterion: [6081]1
     * pleonexias: [6082]1
     * pros to epithumesai: [6083]1
     * pros: [6084]1
     * prokope: [6085]1
     * prophasei: [6086]1
     * sunkleison eleemosunen en tois tameiois sou, kai haute exeleitai se
       ek pases kakoseos: [6087]1
     * skene: [6088]1
     * skenopegia: [6089]1
     * spermologos: [6090]1
     * ten archen ho ti kai lalo humin: [6091]1
     * to auto: [6092]1
     * tes: [6093]1
     * tous horkous: [6094]1
     * tou katargoumenou: [6095]1
     * phantasma: [6096]1
     * choros: [6097]1
     * choirogrulliois: [6098]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

     * 'sh: [6099]1
     * chll: [6100]1
     * l'h: [6101]1
     * ryq': [6102]1
     * r'h: [6103]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of German Words and Phrases

     * (Die Bergpredigt: [6104]1
     * (Gesch. d. heil. Schriften N. T.: [6105]1
     * Christ. u. Kirche: [6106]1
     * Muss in Dichters Lande gehen: [6107]1
     * Theologische Literaturzeitung: [6108]1
     * Wer den Dichter will verstehen: [6109]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [6110]i  [6111]iii  [6112]iv  [6113]v  [6114]vii  [6115]viii  [6116]ix
   [6117]x  [6118]xi  [6119]xii  [6120]xiii  [6121]3  [6122]4  [6123]5
   [6124]6  [6125]7  [6126]8  [6127]9  [6128]10  [6129]11  [6130]12
   [6131]13  [6132]14  [6133]15  [6134]16  [6135]17  [6136]18  [6137]19
   [6138]20  [6139]21  [6140]22  [6141]23  [6142]24  [6143]25  [6144]26
   [6145]27  [6146]28  [6147]29  [6148]30  [6149]31  [6150]32  [6151]33
   [6152]34  [6153]35  [6154]36  [6155]37  [6156]38  [6157]39  [6158]40
   [6159]41  [6160]42  [6161]43  [6162]44  [6163]45  [6164]46  [6165]47
   [6166]48  [6167]49  [6168]50  [6169]51  [6170]52  [6171]53  [6172]54
   [6173]55  [6174]56  [6175]57  [6176]58  [6177]59  [6178]60  [6179]61
   [6180]62  [6181]63  [6182]65  [6183]67  [6184]68  [6185]69  [6186]70
   [6187]71  [6188]72  [6189]77  [6190]78  [6191]79  [6192]80  [6193]81
   [6194]82  [6195]83  [6196]84  [6197]85  [6198]86  [6199]87  [6200]88
   [6201]89  [6202]90  [6203]91  [6204]92  [6205]93  [6206]94  [6207]95
   [6208]96  [6209]97  [6210]98  [6211]99  [6212]100  [6213]101
   [6214]102  [6215]103  [6216]104  [6217]105  [6218]106  [6219]107
   [6220]108  [6221]109  [6222]110  [6223]111  [6224]112  [6225]113
   [6226]114  [6227]115  [6228]116  [6229]117  [6230]118  [6231]119
   [6232]120  [6233]121  [6234]122  [6235]123  [6236]124  [6237]125
   [6238]126  [6239]127  [6240]128  [6241]129  [6242]130  [6243]131
   [6244]132  [6245]133  [6246]134  [6247]135  [6248]136  [6249]137
   [6250]138  [6251]139  [6252]140  [6253]141  [6254]142  [6255]143
   [6256]144  [6257]145  [6258]146  [6259]147  [6260]148  [6261]149
   [6262]150  [6263]151  [6264]152  [6265]153  [6266]154  [6267]155
   [6268]156  [6269]157  [6270]158  [6271]159  [6272]160  [6273]161
   [6274]162  [6275]163  [6276]164  [6277]165  [6278]166  [6279]167
   [6280]168  [6281]169  [6282]170  [6283]171  [6284]172  [6285]173
   [6286]174  [6287]175  [6288]176  [6289]177  [6290]178  [6291]179
   [6292]180  [6293]181  [6294]182  [6295]183  [6296]184  [6297]185
   [6298]186  [6299]187  [6300]188  [6301]189  [6302]190  [6303]191
   [6304]192  [6305]193  [6306]194  [6307]195  [6308]196  [6309]197
   [6310]198  [6311]199  [6312]200  [6313]201  [6314]202  [6315]203
   [6316]204  [6317]205  [6318]206  [6319]207  [6320]208  [6321]209
   [6322]210  [6323]211  [6324]212  [6325]213  [6326]214  [6327]215
   [6328]216  [6329]217  [6330]218  [6331]219  [6332]220  [6333]221
   [6334]222  [6335]223  [6336]224  [6337]225  [6338]226  [6339]227
   [6340]228  [6341]229  [6342]230  [6343]231  [6344]232  [6345]233
   [6346]234  [6347]235  [6348]236  [6349]239  [6350]240  [6351]245
   [6352]246  [6353]247  [6354]248  [6355]249  [6356]250  [6357]251
   [6358]252  [6359]253  [6360]254  [6361]255  [6362]256  [6363]257
   [6364]258  [6365]259  [6366]260  [6367]261  [6368]262  [6369]263
   [6370]264  [6371]265  [6372]266  [6373]267  [6374]268  [6375]269
   [6376]270  [6377]271  [6378]272  [6379]273  [6380]274  [6381]275
   [6382]276  [6383]277  [6384]278  [6385]279  [6386]280  [6387]281
   [6388]282  [6389]283  [6390]284  [6391]285  [6392]286  [6393]287
   [6394]288  [6395]289  [6396]290  [6397]291  [6398]292  [6399]293
   [6400]294  [6401]295  [6402]296  [6403]297  [6404]298  [6405]299
   [6406]300  [6407]301  [6408]302  [6409]303  [6410]304  [6411]305
   [6412]306  [6413]307  [6414]308  [6415]309  [6416]310  [6417]311
   [6418]312  [6419]313  [6420]314  [6421]315  [6422]316  [6423]317
   [6424]318  [6425]319  [6426]320  [6427]321  [6428]322  [6429]323
   [6430]324  [6431]325  [6432]326  [6433]327  [6434]328  [6435]329
   [6436]330  [6437]331  [6438]332  [6439]333  [6440]334  [6441]335
   [6442]336  [6443]337  [6444]338  [6445]339  [6446]340  [6447]341
   [6448]342  [6449]343  [6450]344  [6451]345  [6452]346  [6453]347
   [6454]348  [6455]349  [6456]350  [6457]351  [6458]352  [6459]353
   [6460]354  [6461]355  [6462]356  [6463]357  [6464]358  [6465]359
   [6466]360  [6467]361  [6468]362  [6469]363  [6470]364  [6471]365
   [6472]366  [6473]367  [6474]368  [6475]369  [6476]370  [6477]371
   [6478]372  [6479]373  [6480]374  [6481]375  [6482]376  [6483]377
   [6484]378  [6485]379  [6486]380  [6487]381  [6488]382  [6489]383
   [6490]384  [6491]385  [6492]386  [6493]387  [6494]388  [6495]389
   [6496]390  [6497]391  [6498]392  [6499]393  [6500]394  [6501]395
   [6502]396  [6503]397  [6504]398  [6505]399  [6506]400  [6507]401
   [6508]402  [6509]403  [6510]404  [6511]405  [6512]406  [6513]407
   [6514]408  [6515]409  [6516]410  [6517]411  [6518]412  [6519]413
   [6520]414  [6521]415  [6522]416  [6523]417  [6524]418  [6525]419
   [6526]420  [6527]421  [6528]422  [6529]423  [6530]424  [6531]425
   [6532]426  [6533]427  [6534]428  [6535]429  [6536]430  [6537]431
   [6538]432  [6539]433  [6540]434  [6541]435  [6542]436  [6543]437
   [6544]438  [6545]439  [6546]440  [6547]441  [6548]442  [6549]443
   [6550]444  [6551]445  [6552]446  [6553]447  [6554]448  [6555]449
   [6556]450  [6557]451  [6558]452  [6559]453  [6560]454  [6561]455
   [6562]456  [6563]457  [6564]458  [6565]459  [6566]460  [6567]461
   [6568]462  [6569]463  [6570]464  [6571]465  [6572]466  [6573]467
   [6574]468  [6575]469  [6576]470  [6577]471  [6578]472  [6579]473
   [6580]474  [6581]475  [6582]476  [6583]477  [6584]478  [6585]479
   [6586]480  [6587]481  [6588]482  [6589]483  [6590]484  [6591]485
   [6592]486  [6593]487  [6594]488  [6595]489  [6596]490  [6597]491
   [6598]492  [6599]493  [6600]494  [6601]495  [6602]496  [6603]497
   [6604]498  [6605]499  [6606]500  [6607]501  [6608]502  [6609]503
   [6610]504  [6611]505  [6612]506  [6613]507  [6614]508  [6615]509
   [6616]510  [6617]511  [6618]512  [6619]513  [6620]514  [6621]515
   [6622]516  [6623]517  [6624]518  [6625]519  [6626]520  [6627]521
   [6628]522  [6629]523  [6630]524  [6631]525  [6632]526  [6633]527
   [6634]528  [6635]529  [6636]530  [6637]531  [6638]532  [6639]533
   [6640]534  [6641]535  [6642]536  [6643]537  [6644]538  [6645]539
   [6646]540  [6647]541  [6648]542  [6649]543  [6650]544  [6651]545
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-Page_21
   2. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-Page_22
   3. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxii-Page_32
   4. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-Page_39
   5. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_15
   6. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_14
   7. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.i-Page_35
   8. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ii-Page_36
   9. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_12
  10. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_28
  11. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_11
  12. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.vi-Page_41
  13. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xv-Page_50
  14. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xvii-Page_53
  15. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_vii
  16. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_vii
  17. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_viii
  18. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xiii-Page_49
  19. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_ix
  20. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_ix
  21. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_x
  22. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_x
  23. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_xi
  24. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ii-Page_37
  25. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vi-Page_9
  26. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vi-Page_9
  27. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_x
  28. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.v-Page_40
  29. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xvi-Page_52
  30. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxv-Page_63
  31. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-Page_39
  32. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_14
  33. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_11
  34. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iii-Page_38
  35. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.vii-Page_42
  36. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.x-Page_46
  37. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_14
  38. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ix-Page_44
  39. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xiii-Page_17
  40. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-Page_22
  41. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.i-Page_4
  42. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ii-Page_5
  43. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-Page_39
  44. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_28
  45. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xv-Page_18
  46. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_29
  47. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxi-Page_30
  48. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.v-Page_40
  49. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.vii-Page_42
  50. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_vii
  51. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.x-Page_13
  52. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.viii-Page_43
  53. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xi-Page_47
  54. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.viii-Page_43
  55. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.x-Page_46
  56. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xii-Page_16
  57. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xiii-Page_17
  58. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xv-Page_18
  59. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-Page_20
  60. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_11
  61. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_12
  62. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_15
  63. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.v-Page_40
  64. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-Page_39
  65. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.v-Page_40
  66. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.v-Page_40
  67. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ix-Page_44
  68. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ix-Page_45
  69. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xv-Page_50
  70. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxii-Page_59
  71. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_26
  72. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_27
  73. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_xi
  74. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xii-Page_48
  75. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ii-Page_5
  76. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii-Page_34
  77. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.v-Page_8
  78. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xv-Page_18
  79. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvii-Page_23
  80. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-Page_39
  81. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.v-Page_40
  82. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.vi-Page_41
  83. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxii-Page_59
  84. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.iii-Page_6
  85. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxv-Page_63
  86. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxii-Page_31
  87. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxiv-Page_61
  88. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.i-Page_4
  89. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.iii-Page_6
  90. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.i-Page_35
  91. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xviii-Page_55
  92. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxv-Page_62
  93. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxi-Page_30
  94. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vi-Page_9
  95. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_14
  96. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_25
  97. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_28
  98. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vii-Page_10
  99. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxiv-Page_61
 100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxv-Page_62
 101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_11
 102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xviii-Page_54
 103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xviii-Page_55
 104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.v-Page_40
 105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vii-Page_10
 106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxii-Page_59
 107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_26
 108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.i-Page_35
 109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ii-Page_36
 110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vi-Page_9
 111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iii-Page_38
 112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ix-Page_45
 113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.i-p32.1
 114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xv-Page_18
 115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxi-Page_30
 116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_29
 117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ii-Page_36
 118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iii-Page_38
 119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_29
 120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_vii
 121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_28
 122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxiii-Page_60
 123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xiii-Page_17
 124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-Page_19
 125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.i-Page_4
 126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ii-Page_5
 127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.i-Page_4
 128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.i-Page_4
 129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii-Page_3
 130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii-Page_3
 131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ii-Page_5
 132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_11
 133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxiii-Page_60
 134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-Page_22
 135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvii-Page_23
 136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.vi-Page_41
 137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_12
 138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xvi-Page_52
 139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ii-Page_5
 140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_25
 141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ii-Page_5
 142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.iv-Page_7
 143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ii-Page_37
 144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ii-Page_37
 145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-Page_39
 146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iii-Page_38
 147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-Page_39
 148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.viii-Page_43
 149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iii-Page_38
 150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xvi-Page_51
 151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.i-Page_4
 152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_14
 153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xv-Page_50
 154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.x-Page_13
 155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_27
 156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_28
 157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_28
 158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ii-Page_5
 159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.i-Page_35
 160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_viii
 161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_11
 162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_12
 163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_14
 164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii-Page_3
 165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_25
 166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_vii
 167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xviii-Page_24
 168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_29
 169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.v-Page_8
 170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vii-Page_10
 171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_11
 172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_vii
 173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.v-Page_8
 174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxiii-Page_33
 175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_viii
 176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.i-p77.1
 177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_vii
 178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_12
 179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_15
 180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xii-Page_16
 181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.viii-Page_43
 182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_26
 183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xii-Page_16
 184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xii-Page_48
 185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ix-Page_44
 186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_viii
 187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.viii-Page_43
 188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ix-Page_44
 189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ix-Page_45
 190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.i-Page_4
 191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iii-Page_38
 192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.vii-Page_42
 193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xi-Page_47
 194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxii-Page_59
 195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iii-Page_38
 196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_viii
 197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_28
 198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_x
 199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vii-Page_10
 200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_vii
 201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_26
 202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.x-Page_13
 203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xv-Page_50
 204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii-Page_3
 205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vi-Page_9
 206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vi-Page_9
 207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxv-Page_93
 208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.iv-Page_104
 209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_121
 210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.v-Page_107
 211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_109
 212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xx-Page_125
 213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxix-Page_136
 214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.viii-Page_114
 215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxvii-Page_159
 216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ix-Page_193
 217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxix-Page_171
 218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxiv-Page_166
 219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.l-Page_152
 220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxi-Page_206
 221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxiii-Page_156
 222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxiv-Page_157
 223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxix-Page_161
 224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.i-Page_78
 225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.ii-Page_79
 226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.vi-Page_81
 227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.vii-Page_82
 228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.viii-Page_83
 229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.x-Page_84
 230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xii-Page_85
 231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxv-Page_93
 232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxix-Page_96
 233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxiv-Page_100
 234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v-Page_102
 235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v-Page_102
 236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_111
 237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_112
 238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xiii-Page_119
 239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xv-Page_120
 240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_121
 241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_121
 242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xx-Page_125
 243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxii-Page_128
 244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxvi-Page_131
 245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxviii-Page_133
 246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxix-Page_136
 247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxi-Page_139
 248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlii-Page_144
 249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlviii-Page_150
 250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.liv-Page_154
 251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxi-Page_155
 252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxviii-Page_169
 253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxi-Page_155
 254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxiii-Page_156
 255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxiv-Page_157
 256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxvii-Page_159
 257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxix-Page_160
 258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxvi-Page_167
 259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxviii-Page_169
 260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxviii-Page_169
 261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxix-Page_171
 262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxxi-Page_175
 263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi-Page_176
 264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.iii-Page_178
 265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ii-Page_177
 266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.iii-Page_178
 267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.v-Page_182
 268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vi-Page_184
 269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vii-Page_186
 270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vii-Page_186
 271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vii-Page_187
 272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.viii-Page_190
 273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ix-Page_193
 274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ix-Page_194
 275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ix-Page_194
 276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.x-Page_196
 277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xii-Page_197
 278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_198
 279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xvii-Page_204
 280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xix-Page_205
 281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxi-Page_206
 282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxii-Page_207
 283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxiv-Page_208
 284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxiv-Page_208
 285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxv-Page_209
 286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxv-Page_213
 287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_215
 288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_218
 289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_224
 290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_220
 291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_224
 292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_221
 293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_223
 294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_121
 295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_122
 296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_121
 297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xix-Page_124
 298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xx-Page_126
 299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxi-Page_127
 300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxiv-Page_129
 301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxv-Page_130
 302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxv-Page_130
 303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxix-Page_134
 304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxix-Page_136
 305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxvi-Page_158
 306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxiii-Page_140
 307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlv-Page_147
 308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlviii-Page_150
 309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.l-Page_152
 310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.l-Page_152
 311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxi-Page_155
 312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxix-Page_161
 313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.iii-Page_226
 314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.xi-Page_232
 315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.vii-Page_82
 316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_90
 317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxii-Page_99
 318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxiv-Page_166
 319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_198
 320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxvi-Page_168
 321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_121
 322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_123
 323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxiii-Page_156
 324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlviii-Page_151
 325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_215
 326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_90
 327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.i-Page_78
 328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.iv-Page_80
 329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xiii-Page_117
 330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxviii-Page_133
 331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.iv-Page_105
 332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v-Page_102
 333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.ii-p77.1
 334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv-Page_77
 335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v-Page_102
 336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.iii-Page_226
 337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.ii-p50.1
 338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_112
 339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.viii-Page_114
 340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xliii-Page_145
 341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxvi-Page_168
 342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ix-Page_194
 343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxvi-Page_94
 344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxv-Page_93
 345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxvi-Page_94
 346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxvi-Page_94
 347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxix-Page_134
 348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.ii-p17.1
 349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.x-Page_84
 350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xii-Page_85
 351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xiv-Page_86
 352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.x-Page_84
 353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xii-Page_85
 354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xvii-Page_87
 355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xix-Page_88
 356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxi-Page_89
 357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxviii-Page_95
 358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxvi-Page_94
 359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.ii-Page_79
 360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.iv-Page_80
 361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.xi-Page_231
 362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_110
 363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_112
 364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xii-Page_116
 365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xiii-Page_117
 366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xv-Page_120
 367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxviii-Page_132
 368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxi-Page_139
 369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xliv-Page_146
 370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v-Page_102
 371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxiv-Page_208
 372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxxi-Page_174
 373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxxi-Page_175
 374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.iii-Page_178
 375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vi-Page_184
 376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.viii-Page_191
 377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxi-Page_89
 378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxi-Page_89
 379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_90
 380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.iv-Page_80
 381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxix-Page_96
 382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.i-Page_78
 383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.ix-Page_230
 384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.xi-Page_231
 385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.viii-Page_83
 386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.x-Page_84
 387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.i-Page_78
 388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.iii-Page_226
 389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_110
 390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxx-Page_173
 391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxv-Page_213
 392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.i-Page_78
 393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.ii-Page_79
 394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.iv-Page_105
 395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxvi-Page_131
 396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxiv-Page_100
 397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxi-Page_206
 398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.ii-p18.1
 399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_108
 400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxiv-Page_208
 401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.iv-Page_105
 402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.v-Page_106
 403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_216
 404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.vii-Page_82
 405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.viii-Page_83
 406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xiv-Page_86
 407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxi-Page_89
 408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_90
 409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_92
 410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xl-Page_143
 411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxvi-Page_158
 412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxiii-Page_165
 413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.x-Page_196
 414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_198
 415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxxi-Page_175
 416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.iii-Page_178
 417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vi-Page_184
 418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vii-Page_187
 419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vii-Page_189
 420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.xi-Page_235
 421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxviii-Page_132
 422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxix-Page_142
 423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.li-Page_153
 424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxvi-Page_167
 425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vii-Page_113
 426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.viii-Page_190
 427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ix-Page_193
 428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_200
 429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_200
 430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_201
 431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxiv-Page_208
 432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxiv-Page_100
 433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.viii-Page_191
 434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.viii-Page_191
 435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxv-Page_93
 436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxvi-Page_94
 437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxiv-Page_100
 438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxi-Page_98
 439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.vii-Page_82
 440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xvii-Page_204
 441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.x-Page_84
 442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xvii-Page_87
 443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.x-Page_84
 444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.x-Page_84
 445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_91
 446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_198
 447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxv-Page_211
 448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxix-Page_160
 449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xix-Page_124
 450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxx-Page_173
 451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xii-Page_197
 452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.vii-Page_82
 453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.iv-Page_104
 454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxi-Page_137
 455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ii-Page_177
 456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxix-Page_160
 457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxviii-Page_169
 458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxi-Page_206
 459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xv-Page_120
 460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.v-Page_107
 461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.x-Page_196
 462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlviii-Page_151
 463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.liv-Page_154
 464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxi-Page_155
 465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxiv-Page_166
 466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxi-Page_89
 467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xix-Page_205
 468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxi-Page_89
 469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_90
 470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_91
 471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_109
 472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_111
 473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.ii-Page_79
 474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_471
 475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_500
 476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_500
 477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_500
 478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_311
 479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
 480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_325
 481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
 482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_255
 483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_255
 484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_256
 485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_256
 486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_256
 487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_256
 488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_442
 489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_442
 490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxi-Page_443
 491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxi-Page_443
 492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_435
 493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_526
 494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p86.1
 495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
 496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
 497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
 498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
 499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_287
 500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_293
 501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_293
 502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_297
 503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_298
 504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_384
 505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_435
 506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lviii-Page_436
 507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_463
 508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_527
 509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
 510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
 511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
 512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_357
 513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_358
 514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_357
 515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_497
 516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxii-Page_318
 517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxii-Page_318
 518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_422
 519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_423
 520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_424
 521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_424
 522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_424
 523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_425
 524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_457
 525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_457
 526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_458
 527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_514
 528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_542
 529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
 530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxv-Page_335
 531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
 532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
 533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_483
 534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_512
 535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p63.1
 536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_250
 537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
 538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
 539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
 540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
 541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
 542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
 543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
 544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
 545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
 546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_417
 547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
 548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_283
 549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
 550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_435
 551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxi-Page_467
 552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
 553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_512
 554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
 555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_417
 556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
 557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_420
 558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
 559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p343.1
 560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_268
 561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_268
 562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvi-Page_475
 563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_476
 564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
 565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_478
 566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_437
 567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxii-Page_469
 568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiii-Page_470
 569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiii-Page_470
 570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
 571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
 572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_331
 573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p295.1
 574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_266
 575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_266
 576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_266
 577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
 578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_352
 579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_382
 580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
 581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
 582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_516
 583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_516
 584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_515
 585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
 586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
 587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_264
 588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
 589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
 590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_308
 591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_378
 592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
 593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
 594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
 595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
 596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
 597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
 598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
 599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_368
 600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
 601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p157.1
 602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
 603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
 604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
 605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
 606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
 607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_298
 608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
 609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_298
 610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
 611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
 612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_382
 613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p177.1
 614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_273
 615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_274
 616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
 617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
 618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
 619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
 620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_371
 621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_372
 622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_371
 623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
 624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_397
 625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_371
 626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_372
 627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_372
 628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_259
 629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_382
 630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_391
 631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_407
 632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_519
 633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_248
 634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_294
 635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_499
 636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
 637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_351
 638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
 639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_383
 640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliv-Page_401
 641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_398
 642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
 643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
 644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_252
 645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_252
 646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_397
 647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliv-Page_401
 648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_248
 649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_418
 650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_490
 651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_407
 652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
 653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliv-Page_401
 654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_473
 655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_312
 656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_246
 657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
 658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_483
 659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_483
 660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_473
 661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_483
 662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciii-Page_532
 663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciii-Page_532
 664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_472
 665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvi-Page_475
 666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_342
 667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_397
 668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliv-Page_401
 669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_298
 670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
 671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
 672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_381
 673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_382
 674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_384
 675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-Page_429
 676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_337
 677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_338
 678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
 679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_375
 680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_376
 681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_444
 682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
 683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_457
 684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_496
 685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_497
 686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
 687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
 688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
 689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_457
 690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
 691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_383
 692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_389
 693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_369
 694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
 695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_249
 696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_256
 697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_257
 698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_364
 699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_257
 700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_364
 701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_257
 702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_254
 703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_255
 704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_315
 705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_444
 706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_536
 707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_351
 708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
 709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_499
 710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
 711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
 712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxi-Page_443
 713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
 714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_379
 715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_413
 716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_414
 717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
 718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_378
 719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_338
 720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_339
 721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_420
 722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_421
 723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_351
 724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_246
 725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_376
 726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
 727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_518
 728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_499
 729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_438
 730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_349
 731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_444
 732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
 733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
 734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
 735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
 736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_408
 737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
 738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_384
 739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
 740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_472
 741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
 742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_473
 743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_399
 744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_472
 745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_473
 746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
 747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvi-Page_475
 748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
 749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
 750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_482
 751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_485
 752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_491
 753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
 754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
 755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_497
 756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
 757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_519
 758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
 759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_499
 760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_499
 761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_499
 762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_500
 763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_501
 764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_507
 765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_508
 766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
 767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_508
 768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_509
 769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvi-Page_510
 770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvi-Page_511
 771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvi-Page_511
 772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvi-Page_511
 773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
 774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_518
 775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_518
 776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
 777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_527
 778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_530
 779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xci-Page_529
 780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciii-Page_532
 781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_534
 782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_534
 783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_536
 784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_540
 785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p355.1
 786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_280
 787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
 788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_410
 789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_500
 790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
 791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_527
 792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_530
 793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
 794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_539
 795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_499
 796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_500
 797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_411
 798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
 799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_383
 800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_384
 801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_385
 802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
 803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_384
 804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_385
 805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_486
 806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_509
 807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
 808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
 809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_302
 810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_497
 811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
 812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_457
 813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_497
 814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
 815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
 816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_402
 817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_525
 818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_496
 819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
 820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_391
 821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_399
 822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_539
 823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_347
 824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
 825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_337
 826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_247
 827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_383
 828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_509
 829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
 830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_376
 831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_539
 832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
 833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_518
 834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
 835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_247
 836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_341
 837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_334
 838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_520
 839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_458
 840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_245
 841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_249
 842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
 843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
 844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_300
 845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_301
 846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_302
 847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_328
 848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_329
 849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_331
 850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_330
 851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_331
 852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_328
 853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_329
 854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_329
 855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_331
 856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_339
 857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_438
 858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
 859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_524
 860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_526
 861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_535
 862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcv-Page_537
 863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
 864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_438
 865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_519
 866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_520
 867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_520
 868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_461
 869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_463
 870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_274
 871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_488
 872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_311
 873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_311
 874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xviii-Page_310
 875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_311
 876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_312
 877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
 878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
 879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_438
 880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxx-Page_348
 881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_371
 882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_371
 883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_371
 884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_372
 885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_437
 886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lviii-Page_436
 887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_439
 888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_438
 889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_438
 890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
 891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_461
 892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_463
 893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_463
 894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_274
 895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_280
 896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
 897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
 898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
 899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
 900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
 901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_246
 902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_337
 903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
 904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_410
 905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_411
 906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_381
 907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_370
 908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_337
 909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
 910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
 911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
 912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_411
 913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
 914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
 915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_411
 916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_403
 917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_413
 918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_413
 919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_414
 920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_421
 921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
 922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
 923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
 924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
 925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liv-Page_426
 926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liv-Page_426
 927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
 928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_308
 929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_308
 930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
 931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
 932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_416
 933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_414
 934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_362
 935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_362
 936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p112.1
 937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p287.1
 938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_364
 939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_442
 940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_442
 941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_361
 942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_362
 943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
 944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_376
 945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_325
 946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_312
 947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_398
 948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_402
 949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_531
 950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_312
 951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_338
 952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_339
 953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_349
 954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_379
 955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
 956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_448
 957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_357
 958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
 959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxii-Page_469
 960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
 961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_319
 962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_386
 963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_449
 964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_386
 965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_388
 966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_388
 967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_418
 968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_497
 969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
 970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_525
 971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_497
 972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
 973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_418
 974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_418
 975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
 976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
 977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
 978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
 979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
 980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_526
 981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvi-Page_306
 982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvi-Page_306
 983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_425
 984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_514
 985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_526
 986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_421
 987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_421
 988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_410
 989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_377
 990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_258
 991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_364
 992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
 993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
 994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
 995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
 996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_280
 997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
 998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
 999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_279
1000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
1001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_395
1002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
1003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
1004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
1005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
1006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_463
1007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
1008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
1009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
1010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
1011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
1012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_392
1013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_408
1014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
1015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
1016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
1017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_448
1018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
1019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
1020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_392
1021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_323
1022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_448
1023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
1024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
1025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_391
1026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_391
1027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
1028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_501
1029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_501
1030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_501
1031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_501
1032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
1036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
1037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_343
1038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_351
1039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_378
1040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_388
1041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
1042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
1043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
1044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_352
1045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_478
1046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_478
1047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
1048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
1049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
1050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_502
1051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_312
1052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
1053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
1054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
1055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_411
1056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_454
1057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_454
1058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
1059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_269
1060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcv-Page_538
1061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_269
1062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_323
1063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_395
1064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_536
1065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
1066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_269
1067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_380
1068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_349
1069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_454
1070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
1071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_247
1072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_465
1073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
1074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_535
1075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxi-Page_467
1076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
1077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_486
1078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
1079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_489
1080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_536
1081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcv-Page_538
1082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcv-Page_537
1083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_259
1084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_379
1085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
1086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
1087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
1088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvi-Page_306
1089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
1090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_392
1091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
1092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
1093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
1094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
1095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxi-Page_443
1096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_389
1097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_390
1098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_390
1099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_389
1100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_389
1101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_344
1102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_332
1103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxi-Page_443
1104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_444
1105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_462
1106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_464
1107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxx-Page_466
1108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
1109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_493
1110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_494
1111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_493
1112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_493
1113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_493
1114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_494
1115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_495
1116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_495
1117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_495
1118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_488
1119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_488
1120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
1121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
1122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_279
1123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
1124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
1125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
1126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
1127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_279
1128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
1129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_453
1130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_279
1131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_452
1132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_279
1133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_279
1134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_283
1135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
1136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
1137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_453
1138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_453
1139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
1140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_343
1141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_368
1142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_259
1143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_364
1144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_452
1145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
1146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_257
1147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_478
1148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_479
1149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
1150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
1151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_354
1152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_377
1153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
1154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_370
1155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_462
1156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_463
1157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_465
1158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_344
1159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_344
1160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_345
1161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
1162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_347
1163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p51.1
1165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p291.1
1166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p355.2
1167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p295.2
1168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
1169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_280
1170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
1171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
1172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_295
1173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_543
1174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_543
1175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_392
1176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_294
1177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_295
1178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_274
1179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
1180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
1181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxi-Page_316
1182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxi-Page_316
1183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_533
1184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxi-Page_316
1185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
1186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_533
1187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxi-Page_316
1188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_262
1189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_263
1190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_265
1191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
1192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_262
1193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_269
1194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
1195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_314
1196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_478
1197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_420
1198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_488
1199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
1200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_266
1201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_296
1202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
1203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
1204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
1205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_296
1206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
1207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_296
1208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_363
1209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_453
1210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_296
1211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
1212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
1213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_488
1214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_343
1215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_377
1216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_421
1217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_418
1218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_373
1219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_374
1220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_452
1221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_273
1222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvi-Page_306
1223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_273
1224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
1225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_349
1226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxx-Page_348
1227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_490
1228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_490
1229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_315
1230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_267
1231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_268
1232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_380
1233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_380
1234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_315
1235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_267
1236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_262
1237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_398
1238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
1239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_520
1240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciii-Page_532
1241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_520
1242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_533
1243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
1244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
1245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
1246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
1247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
1248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
1249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_462
1250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
1251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_478
1252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
1253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_531
1254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_534
1255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciii-Page_532
1256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_333
1257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_295
1258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_333
1259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_438
1261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_385
1262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_386
1263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_294
1264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_295
1265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_392
1266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvi-Page_366
1267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxii-Page_317
1268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_246
1269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_376
1270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_425
1271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_425
1272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_425
1273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_247
1274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_344
1275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
1276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_444
1277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_542
1278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
1279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
1280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_540
1281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_476
1282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_516
1283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxii-Page_318
1287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_342
1288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_342
1289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
1290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_422
1291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liv-Page_427
1292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
1293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_357
1294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_358
1295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_358
1296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
1297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
1298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_362
1299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_398
1300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_423
1301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_369
1302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_398
1303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_380
1304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_380
1305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_380
1306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_380
1307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_368
1308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_270
1309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
1310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_301
1311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_302
1312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
1313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
1314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
1315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
1316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
1317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
1318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
1319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
1320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
1321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
1322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
1323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
1324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
1325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
1326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
1327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_270
1328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
1329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_399
1330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
1331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
1332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
1333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
1334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_247
1335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
1336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
1337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxi-Page_316
1338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_249
1339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_329
1340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
1342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
1343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xci-Page_528
1344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcviii-Page_544
1345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_519
1346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
1347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
1348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
1349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
1350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_522
1351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
1352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
1353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_376
1354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_377
1355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_357
1356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiii-Page_446
1357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_315
1358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxi-Page_316
1359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
1360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_259
1361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_251
1362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_298
1363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_345
1364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
1365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_473
1366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_502
1367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
1368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_502
1369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_501
1370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_502
1371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_534
1373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_535
1374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_535
1375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_535
1376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_536
1377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_364
1378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
1379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
1380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
1381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_300
1382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_301
1383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_301
1384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
1385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_508
1386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
1387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
1388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_325
1389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_330
1390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_331
1391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
1392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
1393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_452
1394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_543
1395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
1396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
1397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_360
1398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_250
1399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_391
1400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiii-Page_470
1401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_361
1402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_471
1403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_391
1404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_471
1405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_471
1406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_471
1407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_471
1408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_471
1409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_472
1410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_472
1411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_473
1412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_495
1413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_250
1414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_250
1415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_251
1416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_251
1417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_249
1418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_397
1419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
1420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_350
1421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_397
1422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
1423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_496
1424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_345
1425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
1426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_343
1427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_343
1428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_321
1429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_300
1430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_422
1431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxi-Page_443
1432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_447
1433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxii-Page_469
1434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_471
1435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvi-Page_475
1436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
1437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
1438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_398
1440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_353
1441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
1442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxx-Page_466
1443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_530
1444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxx-Page_466
1445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxi-Page_467
1446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_508
1447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xviii-Page_309
1448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
1449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
1450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xviii-Page_309
1451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xviii-Page_309
1452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xviii-Page_309
1453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
1454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xviii-Page_309
1455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xviii-Page_309
1456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xviii-Page_310
1457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
1458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
1459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_248
1460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_252
1461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_252
1462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_251
1463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_255
1464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_256
1465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_360
1466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_249
1467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_323
1468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_293
1469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_293
1470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_293
1471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_294
1472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_403
1473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_403
1474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_404
1475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_405
1476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_445
1477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_445
1478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
1479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
1480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
1481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
1482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
1483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
1484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
1485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
1486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
1487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_385
1488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_319
1489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_315
1490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_385
1491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_374
1492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_375
1493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_375
1494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_375
1495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_353
1496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_476
1497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_542
1498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_476
1499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_516
1500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_479
1501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
1502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
1503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_540
1504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_540
1505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_542
1506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_414
1507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
1508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_311
1509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_308
1510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
1511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_506
1512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_507
1513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_507
1514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_507
1515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
1516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_441
1517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_290
1518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
1519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_351
1520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
1521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_439
1522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_337
1523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
1524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_494
1525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_494
1526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvi-Page_366
1527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_362
1528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
1529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_441
1530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_302
1531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
1532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_361
1533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvi-Page_366
1534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxi-Page_443
1535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_441
1536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvi-Page_366
1537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
1538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvi-Page_366
1539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_362
1540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
1541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_487
1542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liv-Page_427
1543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_411
1544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
1545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvi-Page_366
1546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_375
1547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_375
1548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_375
1549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_487
1550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_488
1551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_489
1552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_490
1553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
1554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
1555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
1556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
1557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
1558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
1559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_404
1560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
1561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_541
1562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_542
1563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
1564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
1565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_407
1566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_408
1567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
1568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
1569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxx-Page_348
1570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_269
1571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
1572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
1573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_478
1574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
1575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_486
1576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
1577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
1578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
1579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_535
1580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_541
1581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_540
1582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_541
1583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
1584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_342
1585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_448
1586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
1587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxii-Page_317
1588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_408
1589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_417
1590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_416
1591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_417
1592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_408
1593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_408
1594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
1595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_408
1596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
1597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_421
1598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
1599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
1600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
1601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
1602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
1603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_451
1604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_442
1605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_263
1606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_264
1607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_290
1608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_295
1609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
1610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_273
1611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_444
1612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_333
1613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
1614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_410
1615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxi-Page_443
1616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
1617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_266
1618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
1619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvi-Page_306
1620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvi-Page_306
1621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
1622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
1623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_395
1624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_264
1625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_265
1626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_265
1627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_314
1628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
1629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliv-Page_401
1630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_457
1631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_338
1632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_339
1633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvii-Page_456
1634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
1635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_253
1636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_253
1637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_253
1638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_252
1639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_402
1640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_402
1641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
1642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_520
1643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p190.1
1644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
1645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvi-Page_306
1646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
1647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_349
1648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvi-Page_306
1649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
1650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
1651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
1652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_251
1653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_315
1654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_256
1655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_251
1656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liv-Page_427
1657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-Page_428
1658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-Page_429
1659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvi-Page_430
1660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvi-Page_430
1661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvi-Page_430
1662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-Page_429
1663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-Page_429
1664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_527
1665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_319
1666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_388
1667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_530
1668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_445
1669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiii-Page_470
1670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_266
1671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_353
1672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_354
1673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
1674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_354
1675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
1676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
1677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_353
1678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_332
1679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_442
1680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_319
1681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lviii-Page_436
1682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_479
1684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_483
1685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_423
1686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_423
1687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_479
1688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_484
1689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_422
1690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_423
1691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_336
1692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_425
1693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_425
1694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
1695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_379
1696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_413
1697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_414
1698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
1699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_482
1700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
1701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_482
1702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_535
1703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_534
1704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
1705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_387
1706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
1707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_266
1708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_389
1709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
1710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
1711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
1712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
1713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
1714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiii-Page_470
1715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiii-Page_470
1716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_472
1717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_395
1718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_395
1719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_257
1720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_258
1721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_363
1722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_364
1723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
1724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
1725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_452
1726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_464
1727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_486
1728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_488
1729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_489
1730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_301
1731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
1732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
1733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_353
1734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
1735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_353
1736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
1737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_354
1738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_402
1739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_403
1740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_404
1741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_403
1742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_347
1743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_347
1744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_395
1745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_362
1746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_334
1747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxv-Page_335
1748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_423
1749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_334
1750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxv-Page_335
1751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_386
1752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_332
1753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxi-Page_443
1754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_444
1755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_373
1756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_374
1757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_374
1758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_375
1759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_392
1760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliv-Page_401
1761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_402
1762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_416
1763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_447
1764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_448
1765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_437
1766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_438
1767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_372
1768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_373
1769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_373
1770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liv-Page_426
1771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_361
1772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_362
1773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_421
1774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_476
1775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_332
1776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_338
1777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_260
1778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_300
1779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_345
1780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_347
1781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_341
1782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_457
1783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_458
1784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_343
1785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_422
1786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_343
1787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_422
1788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
1789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
1790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_312
1791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
1792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
1793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
1794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_295
1795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvii-Page_455
1796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvii-Page_455
1797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
1798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_351
1799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
1800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcv-Page_537
1801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_385
1802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_509
1803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvi-Page_510
1804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvi-Page_510
1805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_340
1806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_339
1807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_340
1808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_341
1809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_341
1810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_342
1811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_341
1812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_340
1813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_340
1814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_341
1815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcviii-Page_544
1816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_340
1817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_340
1818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_330
1819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
1820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_519
1821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
1822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_524
1823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcviii-Page_544
1824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
1825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_524
1826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcviii-Page_544
1827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvii-Page_455
1828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_416
1829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_435
1830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_435
1831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_435
1832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lviii-Page_436
1833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiii-Page_446
1834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_496
1835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_380
1836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_531
1837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_531
1838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_531
1839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_314
1840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_315
1841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_319
1842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
1843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliv-Page_401
1844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
1845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p26.1
1846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_293
1847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_372
1848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_369
1849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiii-Page_446
1850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liv-Page_426
1851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
1852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
1853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_368
1854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_479
1857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_479
1858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_535
1859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_339
1860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_404
1861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_349
1862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_454
1863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_352
1864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_352
1865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
1866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
1867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_350
1868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_287
1869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_454
1870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvi-Page_430
1871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_296
1872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvi-Page_430
1873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_454
1874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
1875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_361
1876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
1877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_352
1878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_350
1879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_274
1880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
1881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_349
1882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_540
1883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_274
1884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_280
1885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
1886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
1887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
1888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
1889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
1890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_274
1891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
1892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
1893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
1894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_280
1895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
1896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
1897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
1898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
1899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_280
1900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
1901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_287
1902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
1903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
1904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_297
1905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
1907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_297
1908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_345
1909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvi-Page_475
1910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
1911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_315
1912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_502
1913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_533
1914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvi-Page_475
1915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_535
1916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_298
1917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_362
1918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_514
1919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
1920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
1921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_442
1922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
1923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_388
1924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
1925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
1926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_485
1927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_360
1928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_360
1929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_360
1930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
1931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_358
1932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_385
1933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_358
1934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
1935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
1936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
1937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_325
1938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_329
1939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
1940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
1941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_418
1942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
1943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
1944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
1945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_330
1946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
1947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_294
1948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
1949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
1950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_442
1951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvi-Page_475
1952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
1953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_392
1954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_488
1955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_489
1956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_491
1957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
1958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_296
1959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_297
1960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_368
1961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvi-Page_366
1962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_297
1964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_298
1965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_368
1968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_297
1969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
1973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p10.1
1974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_295
1975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_295
1976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_333
1977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_295
1978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_333
1979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_297
1980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_290
1982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_290
1983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_291
1985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_291
1986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_373
1987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_292
1988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_292
1989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_293
1990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_368
1991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_451
1992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_452
1993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
1994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_451
1995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_297
1996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
1997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_451
1998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_452
1999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
2000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_386
2001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_393
2002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vi-Page_272
2003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
2004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_479
2005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_527
2006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_357
2007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
2008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
2009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_433
2010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
2011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_357
2012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
2013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_433
2014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_515
2015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
2016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
2017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p23.1
2018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p53.1
2019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p354.1
2020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_422
2021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_398
2022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
2023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_283
2024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxii-Page_318
2025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_445
2026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiii-Page_446
2027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_319
2028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_437
2029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_478
2030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxv-Page_335
2031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxv-Page_335
2032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_336
2033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_300
2034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_259
2035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
2036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_321
2037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_323
2038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_257
2039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_300
2040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_247
2041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_390
2042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_390
2043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_391
2044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_390
2045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxv-Page_335
2046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
2047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_321
2048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_322
2049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_360
2050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_484
2051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_271
2052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
2053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
2054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_424
2055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_519
2056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_520
2057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
2058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
2059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_411
2060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_402
2061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_447
2062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
2063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_263
2064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
2065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_447
2066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_448
2067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_448
2068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_449
2069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xv-Page_305
2070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_363
2071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
2072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
2073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_452
2074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_258
2075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_363
2076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
2077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_520
2078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcviii-Page_544
2079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
2080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
2081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcviii-Page_544
2082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcviii-Page_544
2083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
2084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_522
2085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_522
2086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_543
2087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_337
2088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_338
2089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_338
2090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_350
2091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_461
2092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxii-Page_468
2093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_512
2094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
2095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_258
2096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_358
2097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
2098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_358
2099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_417
2100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_418
2101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
2102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_410
2103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_421
2104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_387
2105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_388
2106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
2107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_438
2108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
2109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
2110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_453
2111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_321
2112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_322
2113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_301
2114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_354
2115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
2116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_360
2117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_287
2118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_361
2119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
2120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_294
2121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_493
2122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvi-Page_510
2123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvi-Page_511
2124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_514
2125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_514
2126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_543
2127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
2128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
2129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
2130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
2131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_287
2132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
2133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
2134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
2135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
2136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxi-Page_316
2137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_381
2138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_395
2139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_410
2140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_444
2141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvii-Page_456
2142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
2143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_418
2144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
2145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_513
2146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_308
2147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
2148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p355.1
2149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_484
2150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_485
2151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_530
2152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_485
2153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_486
2154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_486
2155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_488
2156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_489
2157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_489
2158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_489
2159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_489
2160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_512
2161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_513
2162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_527
2163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_530
2164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
2165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_527
2166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xci-Page_529
2167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_530
2168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xci-Page_528
2169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
2170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xci-Page_528
2171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_530
2172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xci-Page_529
2173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_530
2174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p267.1
2175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_260
2176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_261
2177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_261
2178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
2179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
2180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
2181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
2182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
2183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_264
2184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
2185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_376
2186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
2187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
2188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_308
2189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
2190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
2191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_308
2192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_308
2193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
2194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_373
2195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_323
2196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_328
2197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p324.1
2198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
2199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_388
2200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
2201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
2202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
2203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
2204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
2205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
2206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
2207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
2208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
2209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
2210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
2211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_329
2212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_328
2213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_328
2214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
2215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_328
2216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_494
2217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_494
2218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_321
2219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_321
2220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_322
2221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_322
2222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
2223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_321
2224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_322
2225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_323
2226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_325
2227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_325
2228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
2229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_330
2230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_330
2231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
2232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_327
2233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_331
2234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_319
2235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_319
2236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_266
2237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
2238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
2239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
2240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
2241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxii-Page_469
2242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiii-Page_446
2243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_341
2244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_499
2245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_300
2246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_302
2247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_302
2248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
2249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
2250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
2251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_439
2252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_377
2253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_447
2254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_447
2255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_448
2256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_449
2257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_449
2258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_389
2259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_506
2260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
2261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxv-Page_335
2262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxv-Page_335
2263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
2264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_361
2265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_361
2266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
2267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_342
2268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_283
2269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_454
2270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
2271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_323
2272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
2273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_283
2274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_473
2275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_258
2276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_364
2277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_336
2278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
2279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
2280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
2281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_352
2282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_384
2283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_273
2284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_442
2285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_347
2286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_347
2287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxx-Page_348
2288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxx-Page_348
2289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_349
2290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_258
2291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_364
2292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_332
2293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
2294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
2295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
2296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_290
2297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_290
2298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_290
2299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_381
2300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_353
2301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
2302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
2303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_259
2304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_323
2305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
2306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-Page_428
2307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
2308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_259
2309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_263
2310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_259
2311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_265
2312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
2313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
2314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_258
2315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_259
2316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_260
2317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_265
2318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
2319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
2320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-Page_428
2321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_484
2322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_265
2323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
2324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_261
2325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_262
2326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
2327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_329
2328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
2329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_487
2330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p26.1
2331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_519
2332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
2333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_527
2334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_347
2335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_349
2336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
2337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_386
2338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-Page_428
2339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvi-Page_430
2340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvi-Page_475
2341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_478
2342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
2343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
2344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciii-Page_532
2345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_482
2346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_369
2347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_369
2348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_502
2349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_519
2350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_433
2351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliv-Page_401
2352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_402
2353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_255
2354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p45.1
2355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#viii.iii-p49.1
2356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_338
2357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_405
2358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_405
2359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_473
2360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_341
2361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
2362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_407
2363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
2364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
2365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_407
2366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_408
2367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_393
2368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_407
2369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_407
2370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_499
2371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_334
2372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_352
2373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_385
2374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_386
2375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_393
2376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_387
2377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_385
2378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_387
2379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxv-Page_335
2380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_334
2381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_332
2382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_392
2383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_302
2384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_414
2385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
2386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
2387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_327
2388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
2389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_315
2390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
2391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_491
2392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_246
2393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_252
2394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_261
2395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_416
2396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_416
2397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_417
2398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_418
2399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
2400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_344
2401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_345
2402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_345
2403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_342
2404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_345
2405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_347
2406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_422
2407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_445
2408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_445
2409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_458
2410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
2411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
2412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
2413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
2414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
2415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxx-Page_466
2416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxx-Page_466
2417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_486
2418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
2419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
2420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
2421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
2422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
2423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_464
2424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_464
2425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_464
2426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_465
2427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_465
2428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_465
2429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxx-Page_466
2430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxx-Page_466
2431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxi-Page_467
2432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxi-Page_467
2433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxi-Page_467
2434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxi-Page_467
2435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxii-Page_468
2436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxi-Page_467
2437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxi-Page_467
2438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
2439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
2440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvi-Page_475
2441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
2442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_271
2443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vi-Page_272
2444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_332
2445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_333
2446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_361
2447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_340
2448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_342
2449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_377
2450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
2451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_302
2452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_333
2453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
2454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_433
2455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_433
2456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
2457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_352
2458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
2459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
2460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
2461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_342
2462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
2463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
2464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_338
2465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
2466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_314
2467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
2468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_479
2469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
2470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
2471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
2472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
2473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciii-Page_532
2474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_354
2475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_410
2476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_410
2477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_410
2478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxii-Page_469
2479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxii-Page_317
2480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_494
2481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
2482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii.xlviii-p17.1
2483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.iv.xxv-p5.1
2484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxx-p6.1
2485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxi-p12.1
2486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxxvii-p16.1
2487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.lxxvii-p28.1
2488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vii.lxxvii-p28.1
2489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vii.lxxvii-p28.1
2490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.ii.xxiii-p12.1
2491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#vii.iv-p71.1
2492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#vii.lxxviii-p47.1
2493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vii.xii-p8.1
2494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vii.lxxvii-p30.1
2495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vii.lxxviii-p48.1
2496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=31#vii.lvi-p11.1
2497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii.lxxvii-p27.1
2498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#vii.xlix-p10.1
2499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.v.xxix-p18.1
2500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vii.iii-p82.1
2501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vii.iv-p37.1
2502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=24#vi.v.lxiii-p6.1
2503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=25#vii.lxii-p6.1
2504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=25#vii.lxxiv-p6.1
2505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.ii.xii-p7.1
2506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vii.xxi-p22.1
2507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vii.lxii-p5.1
2508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vii.lxxiv-p5.1
2509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.ii.xi-p10.1
2510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.ii.v-p19.1
2511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.ii.xvii-p15.1
2512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.iii.v-p5.1
2513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vii.x-p20.1
2514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vii.xii-p25.1
2515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vii.xxx-p25.1
2516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vii.xl-p89.1
2517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=5&scrV=24#vi.iv.xxv-p6.1
2518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vii.lxxx-p37.1
2519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=0#vi.iv.xxv-p7.1
2520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=4#vii.iii-p158.1
2521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vii.lxxx-p37.1
2522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.v.v-p16.1
2523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=3#vii.lvii-p39.1
2524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=12&scrV=3#vii.lxxxii-p17.1
2525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=5#vii.xl-p90.1
2526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=15&scrV=13#vii.iii-p155.1
2527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=16&scrV=2#vii.iii-p127.1
2528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii.lxxiv-p29.1
2529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=9#vii.l-p25.1
2530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=26#vii.lvii-p25.1
2531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=16#vii.lxxxi-p24.1
2532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=17#vii.xl-p90.1
2533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#vi.iv.xxv-p8.1
2534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#vii.iii-p24.1
2535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#vii.xl-p40.1
2536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#vii.xliii-p7.1
2537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#vii.lvii-p39.1
2538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#vii.lxxxi-p45.1
2539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=5#vii.iii-p81.2
2540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=37#v.ii.xvii-p11.4
2541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=25#vii.lxxiv-p19.1
2542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=27#vii.xli-p37.1
2543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=26&scrV=4#vi.iv.xxv-p9.1
2544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=26&scrV=4#vii.xl-p83.1
2545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=11#vii.xli-p36.1
2546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=11#vii.lxxiv-p12.1
2547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=14#vi.iv.xiv-p5.1
2548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=29&scrV=23#vii.lxxxix-p29.1
2549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=29&scrV=28#vii.lxxxix-p29.1
2550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=30&scrV=0#vii.iii-p127.1
2551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=24#vii.lxxiv-p21.1
2552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=26#vii.lxxiv-p22.1
2553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=32&scrV=28#vii.lxxiv-p30.1
2554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=10#vii.lxxiv-p23.1
2555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=35&scrV=10#vii.lxxiv-p30.1
2556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=39&scrV=7#v.iii.ix-p12.1
2557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=43&scrV=16#vii.x-p26.1
2558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=5#vi.v.iv-p7.1
2559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=48&scrV=5#vii.iii-p131.1
2560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vi.v.iv-p6.1
2561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii.iii-p129.1
2562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.liii-p35.1
2563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vii.xxiv-p17.1
2564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=0#v.iii.xxv-p13.1
2565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=0#vii.xlii-p30.1
2566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=8&scrV=0#v.iii.xxv-p13.1
2567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=4#vi.iv.xxvi-p6.1
2568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=12#vii.xxvi-p17.1
2569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=13#vii.lxi-p17.1
2570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vii.xcvii-p38.1
2571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=21&scrV=24#v.ii.xx-p23.1
2572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=23&scrV=24#vi.iv.xxvi-p7.1
2573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=26&scrV=7#vi.v.v-p32.1
2574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=26&scrV=7#vii.xxxv-p33.1
2575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=0#vii.xl-p100.1
2576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=10#vii.xl-p101.1
2577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=32#vii.xl-p102.1
2578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=34&scrV=28#vi.v.v-p10.1
2579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=4&scrV=29#vii.lxxxvi-p24.1
2580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=16&scrV=0#vii.lxxxvii-p30.1
2581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=18#v.ii.xxi-p9.1
2582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=22&scrV=11#v.ii.xvii-p11.1
2583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=15&scrV=36#vii.lxxxviii-p23.1
2584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=30&scrV=2#v.ii.xvii-p11.2
2585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=31&scrV=18#vi.v.xxix-p20.1
2586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=31&scrV=18#vii.iv-p38.1
2587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=32&scrV=13#vii.iii-p157.1
2588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii.xxxiii-p29.1
2589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vi.iv.xxvi-p5.1
2590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.ii.xvii-p11.3
2591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=1#vii.xiv-p62.1
2592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=7&scrV=5#vi.iv.xxxii-p5.1
2593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=9&scrV=9#vii.iii-p156.1
2594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=12&scrV=3#vii.xiv-p62.1
2595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=3#v.iii.ix-p8.1
2596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vi.v.xxxi-p17.1
2597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vii.ix-p29.1
2598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vii.xxiii-p54.1
2599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=16&scrV=18#v.ii.ix-p6.2
2600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=24&scrV=1#v.ii.xvi-p22.1
2601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=25&scrV=5#vii.iii-p137.1
2602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=32&scrV=39#vii.xxix-p15.1
2603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vii.xxiii-p128.1
2604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=9&scrV=15#v.ii.xvii-p11.4
2605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vii.lxxxiii-p50.1
2606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=14&scrV=0#vii.xc-p40.1
2607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=21&scrV=11#vii.iv-p38.1
2608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=1&scrV=26#v.iii.iii-p3.1
2609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vii.v-p36.1
2610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=18&scrV=29#vii.xxix-p12.1
2611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=20&scrV=42#v.ii.xvii-p11.5
2612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=21&scrV=6#vi.iv.iii-p8.1
2613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vii.iii-p151.1
2614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Sam&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.v.v-p25.1
2615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=6#vii.lv-p8.1
2616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=26#v.iii.iii-p10.3
2617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=18&scrV=40#v.ii.xx-p11.1
2618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=6#vii.iii-p116.1
2619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=8#vi.v.v-p10.1
2620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=19&scrV=8#vii.iii-p156.1
2621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.ii.xx-p12.1
2622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=21#v.ii.vi-p5.1
2623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=0#vii.xciv-p34.1
2624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=29#vii.lxxxviii-p27.1
2625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vii.xciv-p34.1
2626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Chr&scrCh=19&scrV=7#vii.v-p70.1
2627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.xliii-p18.1
2628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=11#v.iii.ix-p14.1
2629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.xliii-p21.1
2630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.lvii-p32.1
2631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.lix-p37.1
2632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.lxv-p16.1
2633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.lxxvii-p67.1
2634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.xxxiii-p13.1
2635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii.xxxiii-p14.1
2636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=1#vii.ix-p27.1
2637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=1#vii.lxvii-p24.1
2638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.xxiv-p10.1
2639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.xlv-p60.1
2640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.ii.xxi-p18.1
2641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vi.vi.xvii-p9.1
2642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi.v.v-p6.1
2643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi.v.xv-p10.1
2644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.xxxviii-p29.1
2645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vii.xcviii-p9.1
2646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.v.v-p5.1
2647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii.lxxxiii-p28.1
2648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vii.lxxxiii-p29.1
2649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vii.lxxxiii-p30.1
2650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii.lxxxiii-p35.1
2651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.lxxxiii-p38.1
2652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vii.lxxxiii-p39.1
2653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vii.lxxxiii-p40.1
2654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.xxxiii-p43.1
2655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii.lxxxiii-p48.1
2656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vii.xxiv-p27.1
2657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=4#v.iii.iii-p6.1
2658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.x-p45.1
2659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.xxiv-p29.1
2660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.lxv-p10.1
2661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=24#vii.lxix-p10.1
2662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii.lxxxv-p17.1
2663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xxxiii-p30.1
2664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.lxxxv-p18.1
2665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vii.xxix-p51.1
2666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vi.vi.vii-p53.1
2667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii.lxxx-p21.1
2668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vii.xxxiv-p6.1
2669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vii.x-p44.1
2670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vii.x-p46.1
2671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=47#vii.xxix-p27.1
2672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=4#vii.xxxiii-p5.1
2673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=4#vii.lxii-p10.1
2674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vii.viii-p11.1
2675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=9#v.ii.xxi-p12.1
2676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=19#vii.lxii-p3.3
2677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=19#vii.lxii-p12.1
2678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=1#v.ii.xi-p12.1
2679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=1#vii.iii-p91.1
2680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=1#vii.iii-p94.1
2681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=4#vi.iv.iii-p7.1
2682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=5#vii.xlii-p40.1
2683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=5#vii.lxxvii-p47.1
2684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=10#v.ii.i-p18.1
2685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=10#vii.v-p72.1
2686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vii.lxxxv-p26.1
2687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=5#v.iii.xxv-p29.1
2688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=9#vii.xiii-p15.1
2689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=12&scrV=9#vii.xl-p49.1
2690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vi.vi.vii-p51.1
2691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vii.lxiv-p37.1
2692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vii.xix-p13.1
2693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vii.xxi-p13.1
2694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=14&scrV=2#vii.xxxiii-p33.1
2695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=4#vii.lvii-p57.1
2696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=5#vii.lvii-p58.1
2697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=13#vii.lxvii-p29.1
2698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=16#v.iii.xiii-p8.1
2699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=2#vii.xii-p48.1
2700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=4#vii.xxii-p14.1
2701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=5#vii.lxv-p24.1
2702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=10#vii.iv-p26.1
2703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=10#vii.lxxviii-p32.1
2704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#vii.xxxiii-p25.1
2705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#vii.lxii-p11.1
2706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#vii.lxxxiii-p23.1
2707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#vii.lxxxiii-p45.1
2708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=11#vii.xcix-p6.1
2709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=4#vii.xlviii-p6.1
2710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii.lxiv-p36.1
2711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=7#vii.lxxviii-p23.1
2712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=8#vii.x-p40.1
2713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=15#vii.lxxiv-p32.1
2714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=44#vii.xxix-p26.1
2715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=3#vii.xix-p29.1
2716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=3#vii.xix-p48.1
2717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=22#vii.iii-p66.1
2718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=22#vii.xl-p43.1
2719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=22#vii.xli-p32.1
2720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=22#vii.xliii-p8.1
2721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=22#vii.lxxiv-p13.1
2722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=24#vii.lxxii-p9.1
2723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=26#vi.v.lxxi-p10.1
2724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=28#vii.xix-p43.1
2725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=43#vii.xiv-p18.1
2726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=43#vii.lxxiv-p26.1
2727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#vii.v-p62.1
2728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#vii.xxx-p8.1
2729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=1#vi.iv.xxx-p12.1
2730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=3#vii.xxx-p9.1
2731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=4#vii.xi-p7.1
2732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=4#vii.lxxxi-p29.1
2733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=5#vii.lxxviii-p28.1
2734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=5#vii.lxxxi-p28.1
2735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=6#vi.iv.xxx-p11.1
2736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=6#vii.xxxix-p28.1
2737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=9#v.iii.xi-p4.1
2738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=36#v.iii.xii-p16.1
2739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=49#vii.lvii-p14.1
2740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=164#vii.xlvii-p8.1
2741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=164#vii.lxvi-p7.1
2742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=165#vii.xxxiii-p7.1
2743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=21&scrV=4#vii.lvii-p36.1
2744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=16#vii.iii-p12.1
2745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=16#vii.lxxxi-p26.1
2746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=18#v.ii.xxi-p19.1
2747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=27#vii.lxxxi-p27.1
2748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=23&scrV=6#vii.xxxviii-p28.1
2749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=1#v.iii.xxi-p7.1
2750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=9#vii.xcv-p28.1
2751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=4#vii.li-p24.1
2752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=1#vii.lvii-p35.1
2753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=8#vii.v-p31.1
2754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=9#vii.iv-p20.1
2755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=29&scrV=1#vii.x-p33.1
2756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=6#vii.lxxxiii-p22.1
2757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=7#vii.lxxxiii-p24.1
2758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=19#vii.xcvii-p11.1
2759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=19#vii.xcvii-p30.1
2760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=20#v.iii.x-p6.1
2761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=31&scrV=22#vii.iv-p62.1
2762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=9#vii.xlii-p23.1
2763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=9#vii.lix-p38.1
2764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=9#vii.lxxviii-p16.1
2765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=11#vii.iii-p93.1
2766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=17#vii.lxxx-p9.1
2767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=18#vii.lxxx-p10.1
2768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=9#vii.lxxvii-p29.1
2769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=1#vii.xlvii-p9.1
2770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=1#vii.lvii-p31.1
2771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=1#vii.lvii-p63.1
2772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=1#vii.lxvi-p8.1
2773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=2#v.iii.xi-p8.1
2774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=2#v.iii.i-p4.1
2775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=3#vii.lv-p22.1
2776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=5#vi.v.xxi-p18.1
2777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=5#vii.lxxxv-p37.1
2778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=5#vii.xcv-p14.1
2779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=8#vii.lxxxii-p15.1
2780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=8#vii.xcvii-p36.1
2781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=11#vii.lx-p22.1
2782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=12#vii.xxxvi-p6.1
2783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=12#vii.x-p61.1
2784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=12#vii.lx-p3.3
2785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=12#vii.lx-p19.1
2786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=13#vii.lx-p23.1
2787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=13#vii.x-p62.1
2788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=14#vii.xii-p38.1
2789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=14#vii.lx-p13.1
2790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=14#vii.lx-p15.1
2791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=18#v.iii.v-p4.1
2792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=5#vii.lxiii-p6.1
2793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=5#vii.lxiii-p13.1
2794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=6#v.ii.i-p12.1
2795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=6#vii.v-p68.1
2796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=9#vii.v-p19.1
2797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=9#vii.lxv-p23.1
2798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=11#vii.xxxiii-p10.1
2799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=6#vii.lxvii-p19.1
2800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=6#vii.xii-p11.1
2801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=6#vii.xlii-p64.1
2802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=6#vii.xcvii-p32.1
2803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=7#vii.vii-p11.1
2804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=8#vii.xxi-p15.1
2805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=39&scrV=8#v.ii.xi-p22.1
2806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=4#vii.lxxvii-p10.1
2807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=8#vii.xlv-p28.1
2808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=10#vii.iv-p51.1
2809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=5#v.ii.ii-p4.1
2810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=43&scrV=1#vi.v.xxxi-p20.1
2811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=43&scrV=2#vii.xlv-p52.1
2812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=3#vii.xlvii-p17.1
2813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=9#vii.lxxvii-p53.1
2814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=9#viii.iii-p170.7
2815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=44&scrV=11#vii.lxv-p19.1
2816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=2#vii.xc-p30.1
2817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=10#vii.xiv-p34.1
2818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=10#vii.lxii-p20.1
2819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=12#vii.xxvii-p37.1
2820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=13#v.ii.v-p5.1
2821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=13#vii.xc-p45.1
2822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=6#v.iii.xxi-p8.1
2823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=10#vii.lv-p13.1
2824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=47&scrV=2#vii.lvii-p34.1
2825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=47&scrV=12#vii.lxxxii-p25.1
2826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=48&scrV=8#v.ii.i-p16.1
2827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=23#vii.xix-p30.1
2828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=3#vii.xxxvii-p18.1
2829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=5#vii.xcv-p5.1
2830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=8#vii.iv-p81.1
2831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=9#vii.lxv-p11.1
2832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=52&scrV=2#vii.xiv-p54.1
2833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=53&scrV=1#vii.xlii-p50.1
2834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=53&scrV=5#v.ii.vii-p5.1
2835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=6#vii.lxiv-p27.1
2836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=55&scrV=12#vii.xc-p38.1
2837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=1#vii.xlix-p7.1
2838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=1#vii.xlix-p21.1
2839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=11#vii.xlix-p22.1
2840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=7#v.ii.xix-p17.1
2841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=11#vii.lxxxi-p25.1
2842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=11#vii.xcviii-p8.1
2843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=59&scrV=9#vii.lxxxiii-p25.1
2844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=60&scrV=11#vii.lxxvi-p7.1
2845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=60&scrV=11#vii.lxxvi-p10.1
2846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=0#vii.lvii-p59.1
2847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=10#vii.xii-p14.1
2848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=4#vii.v-p59.1
2849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=66&scrV=9#vii.xcvii-p5.1
2850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=9#vii.xxviii-p28.1
2851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=18#vii.lxxx-p15.1
2852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=2#vii.xxvii-p23.1
2853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=22#v.ii.xxi-p11.1
2854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=72&scrV=11#vi.iv.xxvii-p4.1
2855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=23#vii.v-p28.1
2856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=28#vii.lvi-p15.1
2857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=7#vii.xxiii-p127.1
2858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=17#vii.lxxxvii-p23.1
2859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=75&scrV=1#vi.iv.iii-p5.1
2860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=1#v.iii.v-p9.1
2861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=24#vii.lxxxii-p10.1
2862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=39#vii.xciv-p15.1
2863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=7#vii.lxiv-p7.1
2864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#v.iii.iv-p8.1
2865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#vii.xxxiii-p35.1
2866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#vii.xlix-p8.1
2867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#vii.lix-p10.1
2868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#vii.lxxvii-p18.1
2869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#vii.xxviii-p15.1
2870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=7#vii.xlix-p9.1
2871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=7#vii.xlix-p12.1
2872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=83&scrV=16#vii.xciv-p14.1
2873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=83&scrV=18#vii.lxxxi-p50.1
2874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=4#vii.xi-p20.1
2875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=4#vii.iv-p18.1
2876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=87&scrV=3#vi.v.xxvi-p13.1
2877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=88&scrV=5#vii.lxxxvi-p17.1
2878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=1#vii.vii-p10.1
2879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=12#vii.xc-p36.1
2880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=92&scrV=5#vi.vi.xiv-p42.1
2881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=8#vii.xxi-p12.1
2882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=9#vii.xxi-p11.1
2883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=12#vii.xxxiii-p11.1
2884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=18#vii.xxviii-p36.1
2885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=18#vii.xxxii-p32.1
2886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=5#vii.xv-p12.1
2887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=95&scrV=7#v.iii.vii-p9.1
2888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=1#vii.lxviii-p31.1
2889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=96&scrV=5#vi.iv.xv-p5.1
2890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=14#vii.ix-p44.1
2891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=14#vii.lxxxii-p20.1
2892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=18#vii.li-p17.1
2893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#vii.lxxxvii-p15.1
2894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=6#vii.liv-p14.1
2895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=16#vii.lxxxvii-p24.1
2896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=140&scrV=5#vii.xix-p31.1
2897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=140&scrV=5#vii.xciv-p6.1
2898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=141&scrV=5#vii.xlv-p46.1
2899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=143&scrV=6#vii.lxxxiii-p26.1
2900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=144&scrV=11#vii.lxii-p15.1
2901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=8#vii.lxxx-p38.1
2902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=26#vii.xlv-p42.1
2903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=12#v.ii.xx-p7.1
2904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=28#vii.xxxix-p35.1
2905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=3&scrV=34#vii.xcvi-p7.1
2906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=10&scrV=10#vii.xxxiv-p23.1
2907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vii.xvii-p6.1
2908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=8#vii.xlv-p51.1
2909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=27#v.iii.xiii-p18.1
2910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=22&scrV=2#vii.xxxvii-p31.1
2911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=25&scrV=21#v.iii.ii-p6.1
2912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vii.xiii-p40.1
2913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=1&scrV=14#v.ii.i-p15.1
2914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=29#vii.xiii-p12.1
2915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=29#vii.xlviii-p21.1
2916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.xc-p33.1
2917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vii.xc-p22.1
2918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vii.xc-p29.1
2919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vii.xc-p31.1
2920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.xlvii-p23.1
2921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.xcviii-p7.1
2922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vii.lii-p14.1
2923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.iii.xix-p12.1
2924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vii.lvii-p19.1
2925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=0#vii.xc-p43.1
2926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vii.xlvii-p24.1
2927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=2#v.iii.iv-p7.1
2928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.lii-p21.1
2929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=16#v.iii.xii-p13.1
2930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.xxx-p15.1
2931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.xxxi-p6.1
2932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii.xli-p18.1
2933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=5#vi.iv.xxviii-p11.1
2934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vii.xxvii-p38.1
2935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vii.iii-p81.2
2936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.ii.xxiii-p11.1
2937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xli-p20.1
2938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vi.v.xxvi-p14.1
2939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii.xli-p25.1
2940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii.xliii-p43.1
2941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii.lxx-p10.1
2942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii.lxx-p13.1
2943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii.lxxviii-p6.1
2944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii.xci-p7.1
2945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii.xcii-p21.1
2946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vi.iv.xxvi-p9.1
2947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vii.iv-p35.1
2948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vii.lxxvii-p23.1
2949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.ii.iv-p5.1
2950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iv-p36.1
2951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.ii.iv-p3.1
2952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#v.iii.xxv-p30.1
2953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=22&scrV=13#vii.xxvi-p16.1
2954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=10#vi.vi.xxvi-p86.1
2955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=10#vii.xvii-p18.1
2956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=10#vii.lxxix-p34.1
2957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=12#vii.lxxxiii-p43.1
2958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=29&scrV=13#vii.xl-p55.1
2959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=6#vii.lxxi-p14.1
2960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=6#vii.lxxvi-p8.1
2961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=12#vii.v-p56.1
2962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=14#vii.xcvii-p34.1
2963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=6#vii.xli-p19.1
2964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=11#vii.xl-p93.1
2965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=13#vi.iv.xxxi-p9.1
2966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=15#vi.iv.xxxi-p12.1
2967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=2#vii.xlvii-p19.1
2968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=2#vii.xc-p23.1
2969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=8#vi.v.ii-p5.1
2970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=5#vi.iv.xiv-p3.1
2971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=5#vi.iv.xxxi-p4.1
2972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=13#v.iii.vi-p4.1
2973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=54&scrV=13#v.iii.x-p5.1
2974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=57&scrV=21#v.iii.xxiv-p13.1
2975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=7#vii.viii-p43.1
2976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=7#vii.x-p57.1
2977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=7#vii.xiv-p65.1
2978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=2#vii.xxiii-p81.1
2979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=10#vii.xliii-p41.1
2980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=4#v.ii.iv-p6.1
2981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=5#vii.li-p7.1
2982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=65&scrV=5#vii.li-p21.1
2983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=1#v.iii.ix-p15.1
2984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=1#vii.v-p53.1
2985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=66&scrV=2#vii.xx-p25.1
2986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi.v.xxvi-p14.1
2987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii.liii-p51.1
2988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=12&scrV=13#v.iii.xxiv-p9.1
2989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=16&scrV=19#vi.iv.xxvi-p3.1
2990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii.xlviii-p12.1
2991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=14#vii.xiii-p10.1
2992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=16#vi.vii.xi-p24.1
2993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=24#vi.iv.xxiii-p7.1
2994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=24#vii.xxi-p18.1
2995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=27&scrV=0#vii.iii-p56.1
2996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=29&scrV=7#vii.iii-p62.1
2997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=32&scrV=0#vi.vi.viii-p21.1
2998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.v.xxvi-p14.1
2999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.xl-p96.1
3000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vii.xl-p97.1
3001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii.lix-p27.1
3002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vii.lix-p29.1
3003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=21#vii.xxxix-p32.1
3004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=21#vii.xxxiv-p46.1
3005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=23#vii.xxiii-p103.1
3006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=7#vii.lxxxix-p68.1
3007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=33&scrV=11#vii.xxiii-p187.1
3008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=4&scrV=27#vii.xii-p42.1
3009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Hos&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.ii.xxiii-p15.1
3010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=32#vii.viii-p7.1
3011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=32#vii.ix-p5.1
3012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Joel&scrCh=2&scrV=32#vii.xxviii-p38.1
3013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vii.iii-p176.1
3014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Amos&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii.vii-p13.1
3015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.ii.v-p7.1
3016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vii.xcv-p24.1
3017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.xciv-p16.1
3018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vii.lxxix-p28.1
3019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=14&scrV=4#vi.v.v-p14.1
3020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=6#v.iii.iv-p9.1
3021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#v.ii.xxiii-p9.1
3022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vii.x-p39.1
3023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv-p21.3
3024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.v.ii-p3.1
3025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.xxxv-p23.1
3026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.iii-p36.1
3027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.v.iv-p3.1
3028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vii.iii-p37.1
3029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.iv.ii-p8.1
3030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vii.iii-p39.1
3031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi.v.v-p17.1
3032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.v.vi-p4.1
3033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.v.vi-p17.1
3034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.v.vi-p27.1
3035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.v.vi-p28.1
3036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii.xxxiv-p31.1
3037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii.iii-p41.1
3038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii.iii-p141.1
3039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vi.v.vi-p11.1
3040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.xxxiv-p32.1
3041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.iii-p45.1
3042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.iii-p68.1
3043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.iii-p144.1
3044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.iii-p46.1
3045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.iii-p69.1
3046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.iv.xxvi-p9.1
3047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.v.vi-p10.2
3048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.v.vi-p42.1
3049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.v.vi-p13.1
3050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.v.vi-p44.1
3051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.iv.vi-p14.1
3052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vi.v.xii-p5.1
3053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi.v.vi-p14.1
3054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vi.v.vi-p52.1
3055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vi.v.vi-p54.1
3056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.lxxxv-p39.1
3057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vi.v.x-p3.1
3058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.v.vii-p3.1
3059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.v.vii-p11.1
3060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii.xxiii-p84.1
3061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.v.xiii-p3.1
3062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.xxiii-p99.1
3063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.lxi-p6.1
3064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.lxii-p8.1
3065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vi.v.xiii-p17.1
3066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.v.xiii-p15.1
3067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vii.lxxiii-p16.1
3068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=10#vii.xxiv-p14.1
3069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=11#vii.xxiii-p86.1
3070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.iv-p3.1
3071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.iv-p9.1
3072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vi.v.xiv-p4.1
3073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=14#vi.v.xvi-p4.1
3074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=14#vii.iv-p6.1
3075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vii.iv-p7.1
3076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.iii-p166.1
3077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.iv-p10.1
3078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.xxiii-p139.1
3079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi.v.xv-p5.1
3080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.iv-p8.1
3081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.iv-p11.1
3082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.v.v-p11.1
3083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.v.xvii-p4.1
3084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vii.iii-p156.1
3085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii.lxxv-p7.1
3086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.lxxv-p8.1
3087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vii.xxxiii-p24.1
3088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vi.v.xviii-p17.1
3089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.ii.xi-p5.1
3090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#v.iii.xvii-p9.1
3091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii.lv-p7.1
3092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii.lxxv-p9.1
3093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vi.v.xlv-p8.1
3094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vi.v.xviii-p3.1
3095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vi.v.xix-p4.1
3096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi.v.xviii-p11.1
3097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi.v.xviii-p24.1
3098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi.v.xviii-p18.1
3099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vii.xxiii-p85.1
3100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vii.xxiii-p99.1
3101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vii.lxi-p5.1
3102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vi.v.xviii-p25.1
3103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vi.v.xviii-p26.1
3104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=25#vi.v.xx-p11.1
3105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.ii.xiii-p5.2
3106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vi.v.xl-p6.1
3107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vi.v.xx-p8.1
3108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vii.v-p4.1
3109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vii.v-p8.1
3110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.iii.xi-p11.1
3111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=4#vii.v-p13.1
3112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii.v-p11.1
3113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.v-p16.1
3114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.ix-p43.1
3115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xiii-p26.1
3116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xxix-p63.1
3117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vii.v-p21.1
3118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vii.xii-p44.1
3119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#v.iii.xxii-p8.1
3120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.v-p4.1
3121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.v-p23.1
3122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.xl-p19.1
3123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.lxix-p33.1
3124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.lxxviii-p57.1
3125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.lxxix-p30.1
3126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=9#v.iii.xxv-p20.1
3127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vi.vii.xi-p32.1
3128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.iii.i-p8.1
3129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=15#vii.lx-p9.1
3130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.vi-p4.2
3131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.vi-p6.1
3132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.xlv-p12.1
3133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.xlv-p54.1
3134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.lx-p10.1
3135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.lxxvii-p62.1
3136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii.xxxvii-p23.1
3137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iv-p21.2
3138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iv-p18.2
3139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii.xxxiv-p14.1
3140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii.vii-p4.2
3141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii.vii-p6.1
3142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=23#vii.xxxiv-p15.1
3143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iv-p21.1
3144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=25#vii.lxi-p14.1
3145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=25#vii.lxxvii-p49.1
3146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=26#v.iii.viii-p4.1
3147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#vi.vi.iii-p18.1
3148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#vii.ix-p37.1
3149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=28#vii.l-p24.1
3150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=34#v.iii.ix-p16.1
3151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=39#iv-p18.5
3152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=40#v.iii.viii-p6.1
3153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#iv-p16.1
3154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=45#vii.viii-p35.1
3155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=45#vii.x-p42.1
3156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=45#vii.xx-p26.1
3157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vii.vi-p8.1
3158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vii.xlv-p53.1
3159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=2#vii.lxxxix-p53.1
3160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=2#vii.xc-p7.1
3161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=3#vi.v.xxxi-p38.1
3162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iv-p18.6
3163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vii.xc-p7.1
3164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii.ix-p3.1
3165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii.x-p3.1
3166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii.xi-p3.1
3167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vii.xxxii-p8.1
3168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=8#vii.viii-p17.1
3169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.viii-p4.1
3170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.ix-p8.1
3171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.x-p10.1
3172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.xi-p9.1
3173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.xi-p11.1
3174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.xxiii-p118.1
3175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.lxvi-p18.1
3176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.lxxxvii-p32.1
3177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.xci-p9.1
3178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.x-p12.1
3179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.viii-p21.1
3180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.viii-p24.1
3181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.ix-p12.1
3182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.ix-p16.1
3183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.x-p16.1
3184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.xi-p13.1
3185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.xi-p15.1
3186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.lxii-p25.1
3187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vii.viii-p33.1
3188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vii.ix-p19.1
3189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vii.x-p22.1
3190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vii.xi-p17.1
3191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=11#vii.lxxv-p17.1
3192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=11#iv-p16.2
3193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.xxxv-p21.1
3194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.viii-p39.1
3195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.ix-p24.1
3196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.x-p29.1
3197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.x-p36.1
3198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.xi-p22.1
3199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.xxiii-p119.1
3200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.xxiii-p143.1
3201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.xlv-p49.1
3202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.lxxxiii-p37.1
3203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.lxxxvii-p33.1
3204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=13#v.ii.xvii-p9.1
3205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii.viii-p61.1
3206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii.ix-p26.1
3207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii.x-p51.1
3208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii.xi-p24.1
3209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vii.ix-p39.1
3210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vii.xxiii-p117.1
3211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii.xii-p3.2
3212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii.xii-p29.1
3213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii.xii-p24.1
3214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=20#vii.lxv-p18.1
3215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=21#vii.xii-p32.1
3216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=24#vii.vi-p9.1
3217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=25#v.ii.xv-p12.1
3218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#v.iii.xvi-p6.1
3219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#vii.x-p27.1
3220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=53#vii.ix-p42.1
3221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iv-p21.3
3222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.ii.vi-p13.1
3223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=3#vii.x-p48.1
3224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=3#vii.xciv-p11.1
3225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=6#vii.xxix-p41.1
3226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vii.xiii-p3.2
3227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vii.xxix-p40.1
3228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vii.xxxii-p9.1
3229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vii.xlv-p59.1
3230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vii.lxxxiv-p11.1
3231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vii.xiii-p5.1
3232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=8#vii.xiii-p17.1
3233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#vii.xiii-p7.1
3234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=11#vii.xlii-p13.1
3235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iv-p18.8
3236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=13#vii.xvi-p11.1
3237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=13#vii.xciv-p19.1
3238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=13#vii.lxiii-p9.1
3239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=15#vii.lxxxix-p59.1
3240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=16#vii.xxvi-p20.1
3241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=16#vii.lxxxix-p62.1
3242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=21#vii.xxvii-p34.1
3243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=21#vii.lii-p7.1
3244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=21#vii.lxxxi-p15.1
3245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=21#vii.lxxxix-p41.1
3246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vii.lxxxix-p43.1
3247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vii.xc-p12.1
3248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vii.xciv-p36.1
3249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vii.xcvii-p41.1
3250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=23#vii.lxxxix-p44.1
3251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=23#vii.xciv-p37.1
3252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vii.lxxxvi-p8.1
3253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vii.lxxxi-p42.1
3254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vii.lxxxvi-p9.1
3255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=28#vi.v.xx-p18.1
3256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=29#vi.v.xviii-p11.1
3257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vi.v.xx-p5.1
3258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vi.v.xx-p19.1
3259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vi.v.xxi-p7.1
3260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vi.v.xxi-p3.1
3261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=7#vii.xxix-p56.1
3262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=8#vii.xiv-p3.2
3263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=8#vii.xiv-p5.1
3264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=8#vii.xiv-p14.1
3265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=8#vii.xxix-p67.1
3266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=8#vii.xl-p39.1
3267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=9#vii.xiv-p17.1
3268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vii.xiv-p15.1
3269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vii.xxix-p68.1
3270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vii.xl-p39.1
3271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii.xiv-p24.1
3272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii.xxix-p58.1
3273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii.xxix-p61.1
3274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii.xl-p91.1
3275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii.xlii-p28.1
3276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii.lv-p31.1
3277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=11#vii.lxiii-p11.1
3278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=12#v.ii.xi-p6.1
3279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vi.v.xviii-p12.1
3280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vi.v.xxii-p3.1
3281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=16#vi.v.xxv-p5.1
3282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=16#vi.v.xxiii-p3.1
3283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=18#vi.v.xxiii-p8.1
3284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=19#vi.v.xxiv-p3.1
3285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=20#vi.v.ii-p4.1
3286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=20#vii.xiv-p10.1
3287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vii.xl-p11.1
3288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vii.lxxix-p21.1
3289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vii.lxxxvi-p15.1
3290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vii.xv-p3.2
3291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vi.v.xliii-p6.1
3292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vi.v.xxv-p3.1
3293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=24#vii.xxxiii-p39.1
3294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=25#vi.v.xxv-p8.1
3295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=27#vi.v.xxv-p11.1
3296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=27#vii.xv-p11.1
3297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=29#vii.xlii-p47.1
3298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=1#vi.v.xxvi-p3.1
3299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi.v.ii-p4.1
3300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vi.v.xiii-p10.1
3301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=6#vii.xxiii-p120.1
3302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=8#v.ii.vii-p8.1
3303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=9#vi.v.xiii-p8.1
3304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=9#vi.v.xviii-p26.1
3305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=9#vi.v.xxvii-p3.1
3306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=10#vi.v.xxviii-p3.1
3307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=11#vi.v.xxviii-p7.1
3308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=11#vii.xxxii-p16.1
3309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=12#vii.xl-p25.1
3310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=12#vii.lxiv-p35.1
3311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#vii.xxiii-p40.1
3312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=14#vi.v.xxviii-p14.1
3313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=18#vi.v.xxix-p3.1
3314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=24#vi.iii-p8.1
3315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=27#vi.v.xxx-p3.1
3316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=29#iv-p18.1
3317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=35#vi.v.xxxi-p6.1
3318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vi.v.xxxi-p13.2
3319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vi.v.xxxi-p13.4
3320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=10#vi.v.xxxi-p15.2
3321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.xvi-p3.2
3322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.xvi-p5.1
3323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.xvi-p7.1
3324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.xxv-p13.1
3325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=20#vii.xxiii-p150.1
3326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=22#vii.iii-p9.1
3327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=23#vii.lxxxv-p40.1
3328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=25#v.ii.xxii-p15.1
3329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=25#vii.xl-p27.1
3330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#vii.xvii-p3.2
3331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#vii.xvii-p5.1
3332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#vii.xxxiii-p31.1
3333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii.xiv-p56.1
3334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=40#vi.vii.vi-p7.1
3335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vi.v.xxxii-p3.1
3336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=2#vii.xviii-p3.2
3337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vii.xviii-p18.1
3338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=4#vii.xviii-p20.1
3339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=4#vii.xviii-p21.1
3340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=7#vii.xviii-p9.1
3341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=8#vii.xviii-p11.1
3342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=9#vii.xviii-p12.1
3343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=10#vii.xviii-p19.1
3344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#vii.xviii-p14.1
3345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=12#v.ii.xv-p4.1
3346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=15#vii.xl-p13.1
3347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=20#v.ii.xxi-p14.1
3348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=20#vi.v.xxxiii-p3.1
3349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii.xix-p3.2
3350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii.xix-p5.1
3351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii.xix-p40.1
3352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii.xx-p3.2
3353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii.xx-p5.1
3354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii.xxi-p5.1
3355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vi.v.xxxiv-p4.1
3356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vii.xx-p27.1
3357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vii.xciv-p24.1
3358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vii.xciv-p29.1
3359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#v.ii.i-p20.2
3360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vii.xxi-p6.1
3361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vii.xxii-p3.2
3362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vii.xxiii-p38.1
3363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vii.xl-p70.1
3364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vii.lxix-p40.1
3365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vii.xciv-p30.1
3366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#v.iii.xxiii-p7.1
3367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#vii.xxii-p5.1
3368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#vii.xxi-p9.1
3369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#vii.xciv-p41.1
3370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=30#vii.xlviii-p7.1
3371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=0#vi.v.xxxii-p5.1
3372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.v.xxxv-p3.1
3373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=3#vi.iv.iii-p8.1
3374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=9#vi.v.xxxvi-p3.1
3375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vi.v.xxxvi-p5.1
3376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=13#vii.lxxxviii-p16.1
3377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=14#vi.v.xxxvii-p3.1
3378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=22#vi.v.xxxviii-p3.1
3379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=22#vii.xxiii-p6.1
3380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=23#vi.v.xxxix-p3.1
3381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=24#v.ii.xxii-p16.1
3382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=27#vii.xxiii-p8.1
3383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=28#vii.xxiii-p10.1
3384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=28#vii.xxiii-p125.1
3385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=29#vii.xxiii-p12.1
3386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=29#vii.lxxxii-p13.1
3387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=30#vi.vii.vi-p6.1
3388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=30#vii.xxiii-p16.1
3389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=30#vii.xxiii-p184.1
3390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=30#vii.xc-p19.1
3391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=31#vii.xxiii-p112.1
3392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=31#vii.xxiii-p185.1
3393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=31#vii.xxiii-p21.1
3394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=32#vii.xxiii-p3.2
3395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=32#vii.xxiii-p31.1
3396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=33#vii.xxiv-p3.2
3397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=33#vii.xxiv-p5.1
3398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=33#vii.lxxxix-p62.1
3399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=33#v.iii.xxiv-p7.1
3400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=34#vii.xxvi-p12.1
3401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=35#vii.xxvi-p12.1
3402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=35#vii.xc-p16.1
3403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=38#vi.v.lii-p4.1
3404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=38#vi.v.xl-p3.1
3405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=39#vi.v.lxxvi-p4.1
3406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=40#vi.vi.xxv-p30.1
3407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=46#vi.v.xli-p3.1
3408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vi.v.xlii-p3.1
3409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vii.xli-p44.1
3410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vii.xxv-p5.1
3411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=19#vii.xxv-p3.2
3412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=24#vii.xl-p81.1
3413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=24#vii.xxv-p6.1
3414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=28#vii.xxv-p17.1
3415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=29#vii.xxv-p19.1
3416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=30#vii.xxv-p7.1
3417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=30#vii.xxv-p18.1
3418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=30#vii.xl-p86.1
3419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=39#vii.xxv-p20.1
3420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=52#vii.xxvi-p3.2
3421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=52#vii.xxvi-p5.1
3422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=53#vi.v.xliii-p4.1
3423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=54#vi.v.xxxi-p10.1
3424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi.v.xliv-p3.1
3425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi.v.xlv-p9.1
3426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=3#vi.v.xlv-p3.1
3427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=13#vi.v.xlvi-p3.1
3428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=15#vi.v.xlvii-p3.1
3429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=16#vi.v.xlvii-p7.1
3430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=21#vii.lxxviii-p19.1
3431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=23#v.iii.iii-p8.1
3432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=23#vii.xxvii-p12.1
3433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=23#vi.v.xlviii-p3.1
3434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=24#vii.xxvii-p3.2
3435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=25#vii.xxiii-p138.1
3436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=25#vii.xxviii-p3.2
3437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=25#vii.xxviii-p5.1
3438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vii.xxvii-p8.2
3439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vii.xxvii-p27.1
3440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=27#vii.xxvii-p28.1
3441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vii.xxvii-p36.1
3442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vii.xxviii-p21.1
3443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vii.xxxii-p31.1
3444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=29#vii.xxviii-p23.1
3445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=33#vii.xxvii-p6.1
3446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=34#vi.v.xlix-p3.1
3447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=8#vii.xl-p55.1
3448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=21#vii.xxix-p3.2
3449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=21#vii.xxix-p5.1
3450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=21#vi.v.l-p3.1
3451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=23#vii.xxix-p7.1
3452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=24#vii.xl-p36.1
3453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=24#vii.xli-p8.1
3454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=26#vii.viii-p36.1
3455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=26#vii.xxix-p44.1
3456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=26#vii.lxxiii-p19.1
3457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=26#vii.xl-p38.1
3458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=27#vii.xxix-p47.1
3459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=27#vii.xxix-p65.1
3460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=28#vii.xxix-p49.1
3461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=28#vii.xxix-p66.1
3462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=29#vi.v.li-p3.1
3463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=38#vii.xlvii-p14.1
3464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=39#vi.v.lii-p3.1
3465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=5#vi.v.liii-p3.1
3466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=6#vii.xliii-p28.1
3467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=6#vii.lxxxi-p12.1
3468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vii.xliii-p29.1
3469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=12#vii.xliii-p29.1
3470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=13#vi.v.liv-p4.1
3471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=16#vii.v-p47.1
3472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=16#vii.xlii-p46.1
3473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#vii.xxviii-p6.1
3474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#vii.xxviii-p16.1
3475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=17#vii.xxxiii-p23.1
3476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=18#vi.v.xviii-p8.1
3477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=19#vi.v.lxii-p7.1
3478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=19#vii.xix-p16.1
3479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=20#vi.v.lv-p3.1
3480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=22#vii.xxviii-p13.1
3481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#vii.xxiii-p158.1
3482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#vii.xxviii-p14.1
3483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#vii.xxxiii-p22.1
3484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=24#vi.v.lvi-p3.1
3485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=26#v.iii.xv-p8.1
3486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=27#vi.v.xiii-p10.1
3487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=28#vii.xxx-p5.1
3488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=28#vi.v.lvii-p3.1
3489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=1#vi.vi.xiv-p8.1
3490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=1#vii.xxx-p3.2
3491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=1#vii.xxx-p6.1
3492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=2#vi.vi.xxvi-p22.1
3493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=2#vii.xxxi-p5.1
3494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=2#vii.xxx-p11.1
3495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=4#vii.xxx-p18.1
3496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p136.1
3497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii.xxx-p19.1
3498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii.xxxi-p7.1
3499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=7#vii.xxx-p23.1
3500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=10#vi.v.lviii-p3.1
3501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=14#vi.v.lix-p4.1
3502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=19#vii.xxxii-p3.2
3503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=19#vii.xxxii-p5.1
3504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=19#vii.xxxii-p12.1
3505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=21#vii.xxxv-p3.2
3506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=21#vi.v.lx-p3.1
3507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=23#vi.v.lxi-p3.1
3508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=0#vi.v.lxii-p3.1
3509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=2#vii.xcvii-p40.1
3510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=7#vii.xxxiii-p3.2
3511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=7#vii.xxxiii-p6.1
3512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=8#vii.xxxiii-p21.1
3513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vii.xxxiv-p3.2
3514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vii.xxxiv-p11.1
3515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vii.xxxiv-p19.1
3516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vii.xxxv-p5.1
3517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=16#vii.xxxiv-p20.1
3518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=18#vii.xxxiv-p21.1
3519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=18#vii.xix-p16.1
3520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=18#vii.l-p31.1
3521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=18#vii.li-p27.1
3522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=21#v.ii.xxii-p12.1
3523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=21#vii.xxxv-p17.1
3524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=22#vi.v.v-p29.1
3525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=22#vii.xxxv-p6.1
3526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=22#vii.iii-p179.1
3527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=23#vii.xxxv-p7.1
3528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=28#vii.xxxv-p9.1
3529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=31#vii.xxxv-p11.1
3530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=32#vii.viii-p59.1
3531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=35#vii.xxxv-p13.1
3532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=35#vii.xxxv-p34.1
3533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=1#vi.v.lxiii-p4.1
3534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=4#vii.xliii-p38.1
3535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=8#v.ii.xiv-p5.1
3536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=9#v.ii.xvi-p22.2
3537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=9#v.ii.xvi-p22.3
3538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=13#vi.v.lxiv-p3.1
3539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#vi.v.lxiv-p8.1
3540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#vii.xxxvi-p3.2
3541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#vii.xxxvi-p5.1
3542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#vii.xxxvii-p3.2
3543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#vii.xxxvii-p5.1
3544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#vii.xlii-p12.1
3545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=18#vii.xxxvii-p7.1
3546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vii.xxxvii-p6.1
3547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vii.xxxviii-p3.2
3548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vii.xxxviii-p8.1
3549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vii.xxxviii-p25.1
3550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vii.xii-p30.1
3551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vii.xciv-p45.1
3552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=23#vii.xxxvii-p9.1
3553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=24#vii.xxxvii-p10.1
3554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=25#vii.xxxvii-p11.1
3555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=27#vii.xciv-p46.1
3556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=28#vii.xxi-p3.2
3557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=1#vii.xxxix-p3.2
3558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=1#vii.xxxix-p14.1
3559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=2#vii.lxxvii-p55.1
3560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=4#vii.xxii-p7.1
3561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vi.v.lxv-p3.1
3562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=22#vii.xciv-p28.1
3563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=29#vi.v.lxvi-p3.1
3564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=30#vii.xl-p3.2
3565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=30#vii.lxxxix-p30.1
3566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=31#vii.xlviii-p16.1
3567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=32#vii.xl-p32.1
3568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vi.v.lxvii-p3.1
3569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=9#vi.v.lxxi-p10.1
3570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=9#vi.v.lxxvi-p10.1
3571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=9#vii.xli-p7.1
3572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=9#vii.lxxiii-p13.1
3573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=9#vii.lxxiv-p25.1
3574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=10#vi.v.lxviii-p3.1
3575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=14#vi.v.lxix-p4.1
3576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=17#vi.v.lxix-p9.1
3577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=19#vii.xli-p3.2
3578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=19#vii.xli-p5.1
3579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=19#vii.xli-p24.1
3580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=21#vii.xli-p14.1
3581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=22#vii.xli-p15.1
3582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=23#vi.v.lxx-p3.1
3583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=23#v.iii.xx-p9.1
3584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=28#vi.v.lxxi-p3.1
3585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=33#vii.xxxix-p12.1
3586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=42#vii.xli-p32.1
3587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=44#vii.xliv-p11.1
3588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=44#vii.lxxiv-p14.1
3589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=45#vi.v.lxxii-p3.1
3590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=2#vii.xlii-p3.2
3591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=10#vii.xlii-p16.1
3592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=11#vii.xlii-p21.1
3593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=11#vii.xlvii-p16.1
3594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=12#vii.xlii-p22.1
3595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=12#vii.xlvii-p25.1
3596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=13#vii.xlii-p26.1
3597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=14#vii.xlii-p27.1
3598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=14#vii.xlvii-p27.1
3599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=15#vi.v.lxxiii-p3.1
3600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=15#v.iii.xx-p8.1
3601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=18#vii.xlii-p65.1
3602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=24#vii.iii-p137.1
3603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=30#v.ii.xv-p7.1
3604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=30#v.iii.vi-p5.1
3605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=30#vii.lxxxiv-p17.1
3606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=34#vi.v.lxxiv-p3.1
3607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#vii.lviii-p15.1
3608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#v.iii.xxii-p6.1
3609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#vii.lxxvii-p59.1
3610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=41#vi.v.lxxv-p3.1
3611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=42#vii.iii-p90.1
3612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=42#vii.xliii-p3.2
3613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=42#vii.xliii-p10.1
3614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=42#vii.xliv-p3.2
3615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=42#vii.xliv-p5.1
3616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=43#vii.iii-p92.1
3617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=43#vii.xliii-p11.1
3618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=43#vii.xliv-p6.1
3619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=49#v.iii.vi-p12.1
3620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=0#vi.v.lxxvi-p3.1
3621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=0#vi.v.lxxvi-p7.1
3622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=2#v.iii.xxiv-p8.1
3623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=2#vii.xxvi-p14.1
3624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=2#vii.lxxxix-p25.1
3625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=2#vii.lxxxix-p61.1
3626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=2#vii.lxxxix-p33.1
3627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=2#vii.lxxxix-p37.1
3628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=3#v.iii.xxiv-p8.1
3629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=3#vii.xxvi-p9.1
3630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=3#vii.li-p49.1
3631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=3#vii.liii-p46.1
3632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=3#vii.lxxxi-p40.1
3633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=3#vii.lxxxix-p63.1
3634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=4#vii.lxxxix-p39.1
3635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=6#vii.xliii-p26.1
3636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=23#vii.lviii-p11.1
3637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=37#vii.lvii-p54.1
3638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=39#vi.v.lxxvi-p9.1
3639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxvii-p3.1
3640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=3#vi.v.lxxviii-p3.1
3641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=12#vii.xxiii-p93.1
3642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=12#vii.xl-p87.1
3643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=12#vii.xlv-p23.1
3644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=14#vi.v.lxxviii-p5.1
3645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=14#v.iii.vi-p3.1
3646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=15#vi.v.lxxviii-p8.1
3647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=16#vi.v.lxxviii-p12.1
3648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=23#v.iii.xxv-p15.1
3649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=35#v.iii.xiii-p9.1
3650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=35#vii.xxxiii-p46.1
3651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=35#vii.xii-p28.1
3652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=1#vii.xlv-p3.2
3653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=3#vii.xlv-p36.1
3654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=4#vii.xlv-p36.1
3655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=5#vii.xlv-p25.1
3656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=6#vii.xlv-p30.1
3657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=8#vii.xlv-p39.1
3658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=9#vii.xlv-p41.1
3659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=9#vii.xlv-p44.1
3660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=10#vii.xlv-p57.1
3661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=12#vii.xlv-p61.1
3662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=13#vii.xlv-p63.1
3663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=21#vii.xlv-p24.1
3664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=21#vii.xc-p48.1
3665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=23#v.ii.xi-p7.1
3666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=24#vii.xlvi-p3.2
3667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=24#vii.lxxxix-p70.1
3668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=26#vii.lxxxiv-p20.1
3669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=33#v.iii.vi-p14.1
3670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=33#vii.ix-p13.1
3671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=33#vii.xcviii-p10.1
3672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=33#vi.vi.xxvi-p85.1
3673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#v.iii.xi-p7.1
3674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.xxxviii-p14.1
3675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.xxxviii-p26.1
3676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.xxxix-p17.1
3677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.viii-p22.1
3678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.viii-p25.1
3679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.x-p13.1
3680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.xii-p36.1
3681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.xxvii-p32.1
3682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.lxii-p26.1
3683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.lxxix-p8.1
3684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.lxxix-p39.1
3685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#vii.lxxxix-p6.1
3686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=35#vii.xii-p49.1
3687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=35#vii.lxv-p5.1
3688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=35#vii.lxxv-p15.1
3689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#vii.xxxviii-p10.1
3690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#vi.vii.vi-p8.1
3691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#vii.lv-p11.1
3692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#vii.lxv-p6.1
3693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#vii.lxxxv-p46.1
3694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#vii.viii-p26.1
3695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#vii.x-p14.1
3696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#vii.xxvii-p33.1
3697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=45#vi.vii.vi-p10.1
3698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=46#v.iii.vi-p14.1
3699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=46#vii.xxxviii-p27.1
3700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=46#vii.lxxix-p9.1
3701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=0#vi.iv.xxxi-p11.1
3702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxix-p3.1
3703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=2#vi.v.lxxix-p11.1
3704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=3#vi.v.lxxx-p3.1
3705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=3#vi.v.lxxx-p6.1
3706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=6#vi.vii.xi-p40.1
3707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=14#vi.v.lxxix-p11.1
3708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=14#vi.v.lxxxi-p3.1
3709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=17#vi.v.lxxxi-p16.1
3710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=18#vi.v.lxxxi-p5.1
3711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=20#vi.v.lxxxi-p14.1
3712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=22#vi.vi.ii-p8.1
3713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=26#vi.vi.ii-p3.1
3714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=28#vii.lxxxvi-p25.1
3715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=30#vi.vi.iii-p10.1
3716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=30#vi.vi.iv-p8.1
3717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=30#vi.vi.iii-p4.1
3718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=33#vi.vi.iii-p12.1
3719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=33#vi.vii.v-p7.1
3720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=34#vii.xcix-p5.1
3721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=35#vii.xlii-p48.1
3722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=36#vi.vi.v-p3.1
3723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=36#vi.vi.v-p8.1
3724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=41#vii.li-p12.1
3725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=47#vi.vi.vi-p3.1
3726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=52#v.iii.xviii-p15.1
3727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=52#vi.vi.vi-p8.1
3728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=53#vi.vi.vi-p13.1
3729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=57#vi.vi.vii-p3.1
3730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=57#vi.vi.vii-p11.2
3731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=58#vi.vi.vii-p7.1
3732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=59#vi.vi.vii-p13.1
3733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=59#vi.vi.viii-p7.1
3734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=61#vi.vi.vii-p15.1
3735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=62#vi.vi.vii-p17.1
3736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=63#v.ii.xvii-p11.6
3737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=65#vi.vi.vii-p20.1
3738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=66#vi.vi.xiv-p47.1
3739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=67#vi.vi.vii-p21.1
3740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=67#vi.vi.vii-p47.1
3741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=68#vii.xc-p25.1
3742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=69#vii.lxxxvii-p35.1
3743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=69#vi.vi.vii-p26.1
3744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=75#vi.vi.vii-p44.1
3745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=75#vii.xxiii-p174.1
3746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=0#vi.iv.xxxi-p11.1
3747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=1#vi.vi.viii-p3.1
3748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=3#vi.vi.viii-p13.1
3749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=4#v.ii.xxii-p13.1
3750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=11#vi.vi.ix-p3.1
3751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=19#vi.vi.xiv-p16.1
3752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=27#vi.vi.x-p3.1
3753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=30#vi.vi.x-p6.1
3754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=32#vi.vi.xi-p3.1
3755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=33#vi.vi.xii-p3.1
3756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=34#vi.vi.xii-p5.1
3757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=35#vi.vi.xiii-p3.1
3758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=37#vi.vi.xiv-p3.1
3759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=38#vi.vi.xv-p3.1
3760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=39#vi.vi.xvi-p3.1
3761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=40#vii.xxxix-p25.1
3762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=40#vii.lxii-p17.1
3763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=40#vii.lxxiv-p16.1
3764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=41#vi.vi.xvi-p4.1
3765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=42#vii.xxxix-p25.1
3766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=42#vii.xliii-p5.1
3767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=44#vi.vi.xvii-p3.1
3768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=45#vi.vi.xviii-p3.1
3769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=45#vi.vi.xiv-p9.1
3770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=46#vi.vi.xviii-p5.1
3771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=48#vi.vi.xviii-p6.1
3772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=49#vi.vi.xviii-p8.1
3773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=50#vi.vi.xix-p3.1
3774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=51#vi.vi.xx-p3.1
3775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=51#vii.lxxxix-p31.1
3776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=51#vi.vi.xxi-p3.1
3777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=54#vi.vi.xxi-p4.1
3778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=55#vi.vi.xxii-p3.1
3779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=57#vi.vi.xxiii-p3.1
3780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=59#vi.vi.xxiv-p3.1
3781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=61#vi.vi.xxv-p3.1
3782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=62#vi.vi.xxv-p6.1
3783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=1#vi.vi.xxv-p10.1
3784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=5#vi.vi.xxv-p45.1
3785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=5#vi.vi.xxvi-p52.1
3786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=8#vi.vi.xxv-p14.1
3787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=9#vi.vi.xxv-p49.1
3788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=9#vi.vi.xxvi-p63.1
3789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=10#vi.vi.xxv-p50.1
3790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=11#vi.vi.xxv-p54.1
3791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=16#vi.vi.xxvi-p69.1
3792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=16#vi.vi.xxvi-p54.1
3793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#vi.v.v-p13.1
3794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#vii.lx-p5.1
3795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#vii.lxxxi-p11.1
3796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#vii.xciv-p49.1
3797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=57#vi.vi.vii-p35.1
3798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=71#vi.vi.vii-p37.1
3799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.v.vii-p6.1
3800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.vii.ii-p3.1
3801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.v.xiii-p4.1
3802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.v.vii-p12.1
3803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.v.xiii-p17.1
3804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vi.v.xiv-p4.1
3805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vi.v.xv-p5.1
3806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.iv-p11.1
3807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vi.v.xvii-p5.1
3808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.v.xlv-p8.1
3809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.v.xviii-p4.1
3810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.v.xix-p5.1
3811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.v.xviii-p18.1
3812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.v.xviii-p26.1
3813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.v.xviii-p11.1
3814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vi.v.xviii-p17.1
3815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vi.vii.iii-p4.1
3816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.v.xxii-p6.1
3817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vii.xlii-p47.1
3818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=31#vi.v.xxiii-p4.1
3819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=39#vi.v.xx-p3.1
3820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=39#vi.v.xxii-p4.1
3821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=40#vi.v.xx-p4.1
3822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=40#vi.vii.iv-p3.1
3823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.v.xxvi-p6.1
3824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.lxxvii-p64.1
3825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vi.v.xxvii-p4.1
3826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vi.v.xviii-p26.1
3827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi.v.xxviii-p4.1
3828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vi.v.xxix-p5.1
3829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vi.v.xxviii-p8.1
3830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=18#vi.v.xxviii-p18.1
3831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=2&scrV=23#vi.v.xxxv-p4.1
3832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.v.xxxvi-p4.1
3833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.v.xxxvi-p6.1
3834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vi.v.xxxvii-p4.1
3835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vi.vii.iv-p5.1
3836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vi.v.liv-p10.1
3837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vi.v.xviii-p28.1
3838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vii.xl-p26.1
3839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vi.v.xxxix-p4.1
3840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=28#vii.xxiii-p113.1
3841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=28#vii.xxiii-p46.1
3842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=28#vii.xxiii-p177.1
3843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=30#vii.xxiii-p178.1
3844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=3&scrV=31#vi.v.xli-p4.1
3845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.v.xlii-p4.1
3846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=31#vi.vii.ii-p4.1
3847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=35#vi.v.xliii-p5.1
3848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=36#vi.v.xlii-p6.1
3849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=36#vi.v.xxv-p4.1
3850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=38#vi.v.xxv-p9.1
3851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=40#vi.v.xxv-p6.1
3852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=41#vi.v.xxv-p13.1
3853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi.v.xliii-p5.1
3854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vi.v.xxix-p4.1
3855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vi.vii.v-p3.1
3856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vi.v.lxvi-p6.1
3857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=34#vii.xxx-p14.1
3858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=35#vii.l-p17.1
3859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=35#vii.lxxx-p52.1
3860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=36#vii.l-p18.1
3861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=39#vii.l-p19.1
3862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=41#v.ii.xii-p10.1
3863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi.v.xliii-p9.1
3864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vi.v.xxxi-p8.1
3865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=8#vi.v.xxxi-p15.1
3866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.v.xliv-p5.3
3867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.v.xliv-p4.1
3868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vi.v.xlv-p9.1
3869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vi.v.xlv-p4.1
3870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=30#vi.v.xlvi-p5.1
3871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=31#vi.vii.v-p4.1
3872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=34#vi.v.xlvii-p4.1
3873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vi.v.xlvii-p9.1
3874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=45#vi.v.xlviii-p9.2
3875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=47#vi.v.xlviii-p4.1
3876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vi.v.l-p4.1
3877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=7&scrV=31#vi.v.li-p4.1
3878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vi.vii.vi-p5.1
3879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vii.xlvii-p3.2
3880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=6#vii.xlvii-p7.1
3881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=6#vii.xlvii-p12.1
3882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vi.v.lii-p6.1
3883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vi.v.lii-p5.1
3884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=13#vi.v.liii-p4.1
3885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vi.v.liv-p5.1
3886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=34#vii.xlviii-p3.2
3887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=34#vii.xlviii-p5.1
3888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=34#vi.v.lvi-p4.1
3889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=1#vi.vi.xiv-p8.1
3890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=10#vi.v.lviii-p4.1
3891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=16#vi.v.lix-p5.1
3892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=24#vi.v.xxix-p12.1
3893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=24#vii.lxvii-p14.1
3894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=27#vi.v.lxx-p4.1
3895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=29#vi.v.lx-p4.1
3896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=33#vi.v.lxii-p4.1
3897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=9&scrV=40#vi.vii.vii-p3.1
3898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=1#vi.vii.viii-p3.1
3899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=9#v.ii.xvi-p22.6
3900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=12#v.ii.xvi-p22.4
3901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=13#vi.v.lxiv-p4.1
3902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=37#vii.xlviii-p14.1
3903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=46#vi.v.lxvi-p4.1
3904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=46#vi.v.xxx-p4.1
3905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vi.v.lxvii-p4.1
3906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=11#vi.v.lxix-p8.1
3907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=13#vii.xxix-p34.1
3908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=13#vii.xli-p22.1
3909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=13#vii.l-p15.1
3910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=15#vi.v.lxviii-p3.1
3911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=20#vi.v.lxix-p10.1
3912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxi-p4.1
3913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vi.v.lxxii-p5.1
3914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=13#vi.v.lxxiii-p4.1
3915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=29#vi.iv.xxvi-p5.2
3916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=35#vi.v.lxxv-p4.1
3917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=39#vii.xliii-p26.1
3918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=41#vi.v.lxxvii-p4.1
3919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vi.v.lxxviii-p3.1
3920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vii.lvii-p41.1
3921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=10#vi.v.lxxviii-p6.1
3922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=14#vi.v.lxxviii-p9.1
3923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=32#vii.xlix-p3.2
3924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=32#vii.xlix-p5.1
3925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=0#vi.iv.xxxi-p11.1
3926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxix-p4.1
3927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxix-p13.1
3928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=3#vi.v.lxxx-p6.1
3929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=3#vi.vii.xi-p40.1
3930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=10#vi.v.lxxix-p13.1
3931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=10#vi.v.lxxxi-p4.1
3932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=12#vi.v.lxxxi-p16.1
3933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=17#vi.v.lxxxi-p15.1
3934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=19#vi.vi.ii-p9.1
3935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=22#vi.vi.ii-p4.1
3936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vi.vi.iii-p11.1
3937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vi.vi.iii-p4.1
3938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=30#vi.vi.iii-p14.1
3939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=32#vi.vi.v-p4.1
3940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=41#vi.vi.v-p10.1
3941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=43#vi.vi.vi-p3.1
3942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=52#vi.vi.vi-p15.1
3943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=53#vi.vi.vii-p5.1
3944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=54#vi.vi.vii-p8.1
3945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=55#vi.vi.viii-p7.1
3946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=56#vi.vi.vii-p14.1
3947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=57#vi.vi.vii-p16.1
3948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=62#vi.vi.vii-p18.1
3949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=62#vi.vi.vii-p19.1
3950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=64#vi.vi.xiv-p47.1
3951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=65#vi.vi.vii-p22.1
3952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=66#vi.vi.vii-p49.1
3953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=68#vi.vi.vii-p28.1
3954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=69#vi.vi.vii-p38.1
3955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=70#vi.vi.vii-p40.1
3956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=72#vi.vi.vii-p45.1
3957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=0#vi.iv.xxxi-p11.1
3958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=1#vi.vi.viii-p4.1
3959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=2#vi.vi.ix-p9.1
3960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vi.vi.ix-p5.1
3961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=13#vi.vi.xiv-p30.1
3962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=16#vi.vi.x-p4.1
3963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=20#vi.vi.x-p7.1
3964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=20#vi.vi.xi-p4.1
3965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=23#vi.vi.xii-p6.1
3966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=24#vi.vi.xiv-p44.1
3967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=24#vi.vi.xiii-p4.1
3968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=25#vi.vi.xiv-p11.1
3969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=25#vi.vi.xiv-p4.1
3970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=27#vi.vi.xv-p4.1
3971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=29#vi.vi.xvi-p5.1
3972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=31#vii.xc-p24.1
3973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=32#vi.vi.xvii-p4.1
3974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=33#vi.vi.xiv-p9.1
3975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=33#vi.vi.xviii-p4.1
3976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=36#vi.vi.xviii-p7.1
3977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=37#vi.vi.xix-p4.1
3978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=38#vi.vi.xx-p4.1
3979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=39#vi.vi.xxi-p5.1
3980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=40#vi.vi.xxii-p4.1
3981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=42#vi.vi.xxiii-p5.1
3982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=46#vi.vi.xxiv-p5.1
3983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=47#vi.vi.xxv-p4.1
3984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=2#vi.vi.xxv-p16.1
3985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=5#vi.vi.xxv-p11.1
3986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=6#vi.vi.xxvi-p53.1
3987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vi.vi.xxv-p13.1
3988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vi.vi.xxv-p53.1
3989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=12#vi.vi.xxvi-p13.1
3990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=13#vi.vi.xxvi-p27.1
3991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vi.vi.xxvi-p41.1
3992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=14#vi.vi.xxvi-p70.1
3993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=15#vi.vi.xxvi-p43.1
3994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=16#vii.xxiii-p57.1
3995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=17#vi.vi.xxvi-p45.1
3996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=19#vi.vi.xxvi-p71.1
3997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=19#vi.vi.xxvi-p46.1
3998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.iv.i-p6.1
3999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.vii.ix-p5.1
4000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.iv.iii-p10.1
4001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.iv.vi-p15.1
4002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.v.iii-p4.1
4003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.v.vi-p17.1
4004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.v.vi-p26.1
4005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.vii.x-p3.1
4006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=26#vi.v.vi-p8.1
4007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=31#vii.iii-p74.1
4008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=31#vii.iii-p143.1
4009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=32#vi.iv.iii-p12.1
4010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=32#vii.iii-p75.1
4011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=33#vii.lvii-p42.1
4012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=36#vi.iv.iii-p10.1
4013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=36#vi.iv.vi-p15.1
4014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=36#vi.v.iii-p5.1
4015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=41#vi.v.xvi-p5.1
4016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=57#vi.v.vi-p30.1
4017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=57#vi.v.vi-p41.1
4018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=63#vii.iii-p142.1
4019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vi.v.vi-p35.1
4020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi.v.xi-p3.1
4021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vi.v.vi-p10.3
4022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.iii-p145.1
4023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.ii.ii-p19.1
4024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.iii.vi-p8.1
4025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.xxii-p17.1
4026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.liii-p52.1
4027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.lxix-p7.1
4028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.v.vi-p45.1
4029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.iv.vi-p16.1
4030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.v.vi-p51.1
4031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vi.v.xii-p4.1
4032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=33#vi.v.ii-p9.1
4033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=33#vi.v.ii-p10.1
4034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=40#vi.v.vi-p55.1
4035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=40#vi.v.ii-p8.1
4036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=40#vi.v.vi-p60.1
4037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=42#vii.iii-p71.1
4038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=42#vi.v.vii-p14.1
4039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=48#vii.iii-p140.1
4040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=48#vii.iii-p72.1
4041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=49#vii.iii-p84.1
4042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=52#vii.xix-p35.2
4043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.v.vii-p8.1
4044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.v.vii-p13.1
4045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vi.v.viii-p3.1
4046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.vi.vii-p34.1
4047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.v.xiii-p4.1
4048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vii.xii-p51.1
4049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vii.lxxiii-p18.1
4050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vi.v.xiii-p17.1
4051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vi.v.xlv-p7.1
4052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.liii-p36.1
4053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.lxiii-p10.1
4054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vi.v.xlvi-p6.1
4055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vi.v.xiv-p4.1
4056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vi.v.v-p33.1
4057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vi.v.xv-p5.1
4058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vii.xxiii-p136.1
4059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=23#vi.v.ii-p7.1
4060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=23#vii.xxxv-p25.1
4061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=23#vii.iii-p147.1
4062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=23#vi.v.iv-p4.1
4063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=31#vi.iv.ii-p7.1
4064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.v.xvii-p5.1
4065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi.v.xix-p6.1
4066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vi.v.xliii-p11.1
4067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vi.v.xviii-p4.1
4068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=23#vi.v.xliii-p10.1
4069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=30#vi.v.xxvi-p15.1
4070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=31#vi.v.xviii-p11.1
4071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=33#vi.v.xxii-p6.1
4072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=34#vii.v-p47.1
4073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=35#vi.vii.iii-p5.1
4074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=38#vi.v.xxii-p5.1
4075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=40#vi.v.xxiii-p7.1
4076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=41#vi.iv.xv-p4.1
4077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=41#vi.vii.iv-p4.1
4078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.v.xviii-p18.1
4079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.v.xviii-p26.1
4080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vi.v.xviii-p33.1
4081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vii.lxxxix-p27.1
4082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=10#vi.v.xviii-p16.1
4083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=12#vi.v.xx-p7.1
4084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi.v.xxvi-p8.1
4085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=27#vi.v.xxvii-p5.1
4086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=27#vi.v.xxviii-p5.1
4087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=30#vi.v.xxviii-p9.1
4088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=32#vi.v.xxviii-p11.1
4089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=33#vi.v.xxviii-p19.1
4090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi.v.xxxv-p4.1
4091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vi.v.xxxvi-p4.1
4092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vi.v.xxxvi-p6.1
4093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vi.v.xxxvii-p5.1
4094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vi.v.xx-p14.1
4095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vi.v.xxvii-p6.1
4096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vi.v.xviii-p31.1
4097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=20#v.ii.i-p20.1
4098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=20#vi.v.xx-p9.1
4099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=22#v.ii.ii-p9.2
4100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=30#vii.xl-p51.1
4101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=36#v.ii.xxiii-p14.3
4102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vii.viii-p55.1
4103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vii.xxxv-p14.1
4104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vii.x-p58.1
4105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vii.xii-p54.1
4106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vii.xv-p9.1
4107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vii.lxvi-p20.1
4108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=44#vii.xxvi-p20.1
4109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=46#vii.lxxxi-p15.1
4110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=1#vi.v.xxi-p4.1
4111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=2#vii.l-p3.2
4112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=3#vi.v.xxi-p8.1
4113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=12#vii.l-p6.1
4114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=12#vii.l-p20.1
4115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=12#vii.lxxx-p53.1
4116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.ii.xii-p12.1
4117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vii.l-p10.1
4118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=14#vii.l-p21.1
4119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=18#vi.v.xxxii-p4.1
4120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=36#vii.xiv-p6.1
4121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=36#vii.li-p5.1
4122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=36#vi.v.lxxx-p4.1
4123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=37#vii.li-p3.2
4124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=41#vii.li-p10.1
4125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=42#vi.v.xxi-p19.1
4126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vii.liii-p22.1
4127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=19#vi.v.xli-p5.1
4128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vi.v.xli-p6.1
4129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vi.v.xlii-p5.1
4130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vi.v.xliii-p5.1
4131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=22#vi.v.xxv-p4.1
4132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=24#vi.v.xxv-p10.1
4133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=25#vi.v.xxv-p7.1
4134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=40#vi.v.xxix-p6.1
4135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=41#vii.xxix-p30.1
4136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=45#vii.xiv-p20.1
4137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=50#vi.v.xxix-p11.1
4138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=1#vi.v.xxxi-p11.1
4139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=3#vi.v.xxxiii-p4.1
4140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=3#vi.v.xxxi-p15.2
4141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vi.v.xliv-p6.1
4142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=9#vi.v.xlvi-p4.1
4143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=10#vi.v.xlviii-p9.1
4144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=10#vi.v.xlvi-p7.1
4145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=12#vi.v.xlvii-p4.1
4146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=17#vi.v.xlviii-p11.1
4147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=18#vi.v.liv-p6.1
4148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=25#vi.v.lvi-p5.1
4149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=28#vi.vi.xiv-p7.1
4150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=28#vii.xxx-p6.1
4151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=38#vi.v.lix-p5.1
4152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=44#vi.v.lx-p4.1
4153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=46#vi.v.lxii-p5.1
4154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=46#vi.v.lxiv-p5.1
4155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=49#vi.vii.vi-p4.2
4156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=50#vi.vii.vi-p12.1
4157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=51#vi.v.lxiii-p3.1
4158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=52#v.ii.xx-p13.1
4159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=57#vi.v.xxiv-p4.1
4160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=57#vii.xiv-p9.1
4161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=57#vii.lii-p3.2
4162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=57#vii.lii-p5.1
4163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=58#vii.xiv-p7.1
4164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=58#vii.lii-p9.1
4165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=59#vii.xiv-p11.1
4166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=59#vii.lii-p11.1
4167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=60#vii.lii-p13.1
4168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=61#vi.v.xxiv-p5.1
4169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=61#vii.lii-p17.1
4170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=62#vii.lii-p18.1
4171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=1#vi.v.xxiv-p6.1
4172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vii.liii-p3.2
4173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vii.liii-p5.1
4174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vii.liii-p12.1
4175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vii.liii-p13.1
4176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=4#vi.v.xxxiii-p4.1
4177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=4#vii.liii-p29.1
4178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=11#vii.xl-p95.1
4179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.ii.xxi-p14.1
4180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=15#vii.liii-p40.1
4181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vi.vii.vi-p9.1
4182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.liv-p3.2
4183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.liv-p5.1
4184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vii.xciv-p32.1
4185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vii.xcvii-p3.4
4186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vii.xcvii-p8.1
4187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=20#v.iii.xxv-p10.1
4188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=20#vi.vii.xi-p30.1
4189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=20#vii.xciv-p33.1
4190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=20#vii.xcvii-p41.1
4191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=21#vi.v.xxxiv-p6.1
4192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=25#vi.v.lxxiv-p7.1
4193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=29#vi.v.lxxiv-p8.1
4194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii.lxxi-p22.1
4195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii.lxxxiii-p33.1
4196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=35#v.ii.xvi-p10.1
4197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=36#v.ii.xxi-p9.2
4198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=38#vii.lv-p3.2
4199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=38#vii.lvi-p3.2
4200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=41#vii.lv-p14.1
4201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=41#vii.lvi-p5.1
4202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=42#vii.lv-p15.1
4203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=42#vii.lv-p27.1
4204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=3#v.iii.vii-p11.2
4205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=5#vii.xiii-p22.1
4206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=5#vii.lvii-p3.2
4207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=5#vii.lvii-p5.1
4208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=11#vii.lvii-p18.1
4209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=12#vii.xiii-p6.1
4210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=14#vi.v.xxxviii-p4.1
4211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=14#vi.v.xxxix-p5.1
4212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=14#vi.v.lxiii-p3.2
4213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=16#vi.v.xl-p4.1
4214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=27#vi.v.xl-p5.1
4215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=29#vi.v.lxxvi-p5.1
4216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=37#vi.v.xl-p7.1
4217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=39#vii.lviii-p3.2
4218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=39#vii.lviii-p5.1
4219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=40#vi.v.lxxvi-p6.1
4220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=41#vii.lviii-p9.1
4221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=42#vii.lviii-p12.1
4222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=52#vii.xxvi-p8.1
4223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=8#vii.xxiii-p172.1
4224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vii.xxiii-p47.1
4225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=10#vii.xxiii-p173.1
4226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=13#vii.lix-p8.1
4227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=14#vii.lix-p11.1
4228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=15#vii.lix-p3.2
4229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=15#vii.lix-p6.1
4230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=15#vii.lix-p15.1
4231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=16#vii.xxxviii-p41.1
4232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=16#vii.lix-p17.1
4233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=18#vii.lix-p19.1
4234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=20#v.iii.ix-p23.1
4235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=20#vii.lix-p21.1
4236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=33#vii.xxxviii-p25.1
4237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=33#vii.xl-p50.1
4238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=33#vii.lxv-p18.1
4239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=35#vii.xlv-p13.1
4240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=35#vii.lx-p3.2
4241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=35#vii.lx-p12.1
4242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=35#vii.lvii-p40.1
4243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=36#vii.lx-p14.1
4244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=37#vii.lv-p30.1
4245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=47#v.ii.xx-p9.1
4246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=48#v.ii.xx-p9.1
4247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=48#vi.vi.vi-p4.1
4248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=48#vii.xxiv-p32.1
4249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=49#vii.xxiii-p90.1
4250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=56#vii.lxi-p3.2
4251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=58#vii.lxi-p3.2
4252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=58#vii.lxi-p13.1
4253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=58#vii.lxi-p11.1
4254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=1#v.iii.viii-p5.1
4255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=6#vii.lxii-p3.2
4256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=7#vii.xxiv-p16.1
4257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vii.lxii-p7.1
4258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=21#vii.lxiii-p3.1
4259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=21#vii.lxiii-p5.1
4260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=23#vii.lxiii-p3.1
4261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=23#vii.lxiii-p7.1
4262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=24#vii.lxiii-p8.1
4263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=31#vi.v.lxxvi-p11.1
4264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=32#vi.vi.xxvi-p56.1
4265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=11#vii.xxxiv-p17.1
4266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=11#vii.v-p9.1
4267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=11#vii.lxxxix-p58.1
4268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=15#vii.lxiv-p21.1
4269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=16#vii.lxiv-p3.2
4270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=16#vii.lxiv-p8.1
4271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=16#vi.v.lxxii-p4.1
4272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=18#vii.lxiv-p12.1
4273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=22#vii.lxiv-p38.1
4274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v.ii.xv-p3.1
4275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=26#v.ii.xv-p11.1
4276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=7#v.ii.xi-p17.1
4277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=17#vii.xlviii-p10.1
4278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=18#vii.xlviii-p11.1
4279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vii.lxv-p3.2
4280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=19#vii.xxxviii-p43.1
4281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=19#vii.liv-p8.1
4282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=22#vii.xlix-p15.1
4283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=22#vii.liv-p9.1
4284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=25#vii.liv-p12.1
4285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=29#vii.lxxxi-p46.1
4286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=3#v.ii.xxii-p12.1
4287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=3#vii.lxvi-p3.2
4288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=4#vii.lxvi-p6.1
4289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii.xxxii-p6.1
4290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii.xxxii-p30.1
4291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=5#vii.lxvii-p13.1
4292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=20#vii.lxi-p7.1
4293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=21#vii.lxi-p8.1
4294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=32#vii.xlviii-p31.1
4295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#v.iii.iii-p10.4
4296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#vii.xiii-p24.1
4297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#vii.xxxii-p10.1
4298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#vii.lxvii-p3.2
4299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#vii.lxvii-p6.1
4300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=2#vii.xiii-p19.1
4301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=2#vii.lvii-p6.1
4302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=2#v.iii.xv-p16.1
4303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=8#vii.xl-p88.1
4304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=8#vii.lxvii-p7.1
4305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=9#vii.lxvii-p16.1
4306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=10#vii.lxxxviii-p9.1
4307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=10#vii.lxxxix-p13.1
4308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=10#vii.x-p30.1
4309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=11#v.iii.iii-p3.1
4310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=11#vii.lxxxix-p14.1
4311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=12#vii.xxxvii-p22.1
4312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=12#vii.lxvii-p17.1
4313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=13#vii.x-p31.1
4314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=13#vii.lxvii-p18.1
4315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=13#vii.lxxxvii-p25.1
4316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=13#vii.lxxxix-p15.1
4317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=14#vii.v-p9.1
4318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=14#vii.lxvii-p21.1
4319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=14#vii.lxvii-p22.1
4320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=14#vii.lxxxix-p16.1
4321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=16#vii.lxvii-p28.1
4322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=18#vi.v.lxiv-p7.1
4323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=19#vii.xiii-p8.1
4324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=31#vi.v.lxv-p4.1
4325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=35#vi.v.lxvi-p8.1
4326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=35#vi.v.xxx-p4.1
4327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=1#vi.v.lxvii-p5.1
4328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=2#vii.lxv-p13.1
4329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=6#vii.xiv-p13.1
4330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=8#vii.xl-p52.1
4331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=9#vii.lxv-p14.1
4332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=10#vii.xli-p10.1
4333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=10#vii.lxvii-p26.1
4334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vii.lxxxix-p70.1
4335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=22#vii.lxxvii-p46.1
4336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=39#vii.lxxiii-p14.1
4337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=45#vi.v.lxviii-p3.1
4338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=47#vi.v.lxx-p4.1
4339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=2#vii.lxxx-p11.1
4340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=9#vi.v.lxxi-p4.1
4341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=15#vi.v.lxxi-p7.1
4342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=16#vi.v.lxxvii-p5.1
4343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vii.xliii-p8.1
4344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=19#vi.v.lxxii-p5.1
4345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=20#vi.v.lxxiii-p4.1
4346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=41#vi.v.lxxv-p5.1
4347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vi.vii.viii-p4.1
4348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=7#vi.v.lxxviii-p3.1
4349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=18#vii.xiv-p57.1
4350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=20#vi.v.lxxviii-p10.1
4351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=21#vi.v.lxxviii-p13.1
4352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=33#vii.lvii-p48.1
4353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=34#vi.v.lxxviii-p15.1
4354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=0#vi.iv.xxxi-p11.1
4355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxix-p4.1
4356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=3#vi.v.lxxxi-p4.1
4357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=4#vi.vi.ix-p12.1
4358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=7#vi.v.lxxxi-p16.1
4359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=14#vi.v.lxxxi-p15.1
4360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=21#vii.xxiii-p64.1
4361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=21#vi.vi.ii-p12.1
4362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=24#vii.xcvii-p39.1
4363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=24#vi.v.lxv-p5.1
4364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=24#vi.vi.iv-p6.1
4365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#vii.xxiii-p175.1
4366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#v.iii.ix-p25.1
4367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#vii.lxvii-p12.1
4368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#vi.vi.iii-p9.1
4369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#vi.vi.iii-p4.1
4370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=31#vi.vi.iv-p7.1
4371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=33#vii.lxxxix-p10.1
4372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=33#vii.xcix-p5.1
4373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=39#vi.vi.v-p5.1
4374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=46#vii.lxvii-p10.1
4375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=49#vi.vi.ii-p4.1
4376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=51#vi.vi.vi-p7.1
4377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=53#vi.vi.vi-p14.1
4378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=54#vi.vi.vii-p5.1
4379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=54#vi.vi.vii-p9.1
4380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=54#vi.vi.vii-p29.1
4381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=59#vi.vi.vii-p41.1
4382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=61#vi.vi.vii-p46.1
4383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=63#vi.vi.viii-p5.1
4384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=0#vi.iv.xxxi-p11.1
4385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=2#vi.vi.ix-p11.1
4386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=13#vi.vi.ix-p13.1
4387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=15#vi.vi.ix-p15.1
4388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=16#vi.vi.xiv-p18.1
4389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=18#vi.vi.xiv-p18.1
4390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=20#vi.vi.xiv-p19.1
4391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=22#vi.vi.xiv-p20.1
4392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=24#vi.vi.ix-p16.1
4393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=26#vi.vi.xi-p5.1
4394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=33#vi.vi.xv-p4.1
4395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=33#v.iii.xviii-p16.1
4396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#v.ii.xxii-p7.1
4397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vii.viii-p14.1
4398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vii.viii-p56.1
4399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vii.xv-p8.1
4400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vii.xxix-p24.1
4401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vii.xxxii-p20.1
4402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vii.xxxii-p28.1
4403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vii.xxxix-p44.1
4404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vii.xlii-p52.1
4405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vii.xlii-p57.1
4406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vii.xc-p28.1
4407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#vi.vi.xiii-p5.1
4408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=35#vi.vi.xvi-p5.1
4409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=36#vi.vi.xviii-p9.1
4410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=39#vi.vi.xvii-p5.1
4411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=40#vi.vi.xvii-p6.1
4412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=42#vii.xix-p38.1
4413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=44#vi.vi.xiv-p9.1
4414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=44#vi.vi.xviii-p4.1
4415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=45#vi.vi.xx-p5.1
4416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=46#vi.vi.xix-p5.1
4417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=47#vi.vi.xxi-p6.1
4418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=48#vi.vi.xxii-p5.1
4419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=50#vi.vi.xxiii-p6.1
4420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=53#vi.vi.xxiv-p6.1
4421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=54#vi.vi.xxv-p36.1
4422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=5#vi.vi.xxv-p47.1
4423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=10#vi.vi.xxv-p52.1
4424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=12#vi.vi.xxvi-p8.1
4425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=13#vi.vi.xxvi-p7.1
4426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=15#vi.vi.xxvi-p65.1
4427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=28#vii.xli-p3.4
4428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=28#vii.xli-p26.1
4429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=33#vi.vi.xxvi-p25.1
4430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=35#vi.vi.xxvi-p26.1
4431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=35#vi.vi.xxvi-p64.1
4432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=36#vii.lxviii-p3.2
4433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=36#vii.lxviii-p5.1
4434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=36#vi.vi.xxvi-p30.1
4435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=38#vii.lxviii-p8.1
4436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=38#vii.lxiv-p31.1
4437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=38#vii.lxviii-p11.1
4438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=39#vii.xxvii-p30.1
4439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=41#vii.lxviii-p13.1
4440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=41#vi.vi.xxvi-p33.1
4441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#vii.lxviii-p17.1
4442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#vii.lxviii-p18.1
4443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#vi.vi.xxvi-p35.1
4444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=45#vii.lxviii-p19.1
4445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=45#vii.lxxxi-p31.1
4446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=46#vi.v.xiii-p12.1
4447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=46#vii.lxviii-p22.1
4448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=46#vii.lxxxi-p47.1
4449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=46#vii.xxiii-p100.1
4450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#vii.lxviii-p23.1
4451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=50#vi.vi.xxvi-p72.1
4452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.iv.iv-p5.1
4453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.vii.xi-p5.1
4454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.xxx-p26.1
4455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.xxxii-p23.1
4456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.xliii-p12.1
4457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.xliv-p15.1
4458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.xlix-p19.1
4459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lvi-p13.1
4460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxix-p3.2
4461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxix-p9.1
4462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxix-p13.1
4463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxix-p34.1
4464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxx-p5.1
4465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxx-p7.1
4466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxi-p10.1
4467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxii-p5.1
4468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxvi-p14.1
4469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxvii-p19.1
4470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxviii-p25.1
4471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxviii-p29.1
4472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxviii-p52.1
4473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxxv-p32.1
4474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxxvii-p17.1
4475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxxvii-p38.1
4476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.iv.iv-p5.1
4477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.iv-p21.1
4478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.xv-p13.1
4479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.xlix-p19.1
4480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.lxix-p5.1
4481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.lxx-p9.1
4482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.lxxii-p7.1
4483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.lxxvii-p24.1
4484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.lxxviii-p39.1
4485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.lxxviii-p53.1
4486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.lxxix-p14.1
4487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.xciii-p19.1
4488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.iv.vi-p17.1
4489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vi.vi.xxvi-p83.1
4490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=6#vi.v.vii-p9.1
4491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.xix-p45.1
4492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.lxxiii-p15.1
4493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.xxvii-p18.1
4494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.xxx-p12.1
4495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.lxxxv-p34.1
4496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.xxxiii-p18.1
4497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.xlviii-p19.1
4498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.lx-p7.1
4499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.lxxiii-p3.2
4500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.lxxiii-p5.1
4501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.lxxiii-p9.1
4502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.lv-p9.1
4503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.lxxi-p17.1
4504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.ii.xxiii-p4.1
4505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#v.iii.iv-p10.1
4506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii.xxxiii-p34.1
4507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii.xxiv-p8.1
4508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii.lxxiii-p12.1
4509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii.xcv-p9.1
4510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vi.v.iv-p12.1
4511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii.lxxiii-p21.1
4512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.iv.iv-p6.1
4513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.v.iv-p13.1
4514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vi.vii.xi-p5.1
4515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.iii-p164.1
4516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.xxxii-p25.1
4517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.xliii-p13.1
4518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.xliv-p17.1
4519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.xlix-p20.1
4520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.lvi-p14.1
4521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.lxxi-p16.1
4522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.lxxiii-p23.1
4523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.lxxvi-p11.1
4524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.lxxix-p26.1
4525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.lxxxv-p35.1
4526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.lxxxvi-p27.1
4527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vi.v.xiii-p19.1
4528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vi.vii.xi-p34.1
4529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.xviii-p7.1
4530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.xix-p46.1
4531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.iii.xx-p10.1
4532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.v.xiii-p5.1
4533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vi.v.xiii-p13.1
4534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vii.xviii-p6.1
4535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#vi.v.v-p21.1
4536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#vii.xviii-p13.1
4537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=32#vi.v.xiv-p4.1
4538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=33#vi.v.xvi-p3.1
4539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=33#vii.lxxxi-p37.1
4540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=35#vi.v.xviii-p18.1
4541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=35#vi.v.xviii-p26.1
4542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=39#vi.v.xviii-p5.1
4543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=42#vi.v.liv-p9.1
4544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=42#vi.v.xviii-p9.1
4545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=42#vi.v.xviii-p27.1
4546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=42#vi.vii.iv-p7.1
4547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=47#vii.xli-p38.1
4548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=47#vii.lxxiv-p34.1
4549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=48#vii.xxi-p21.1
4550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=48#vii.lxxiv-p3.2
4551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=48#vii.lxxiv-p7.1
4552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=48#vii.lxxiv-p35.1
4553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=49#vii.lxxiv-p8.1
4554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=50#vii.lxxiv-p10.1
4555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=50#vii.lxxiv-p36.1
4556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=50#vii.lxxv-p12.1
4557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=51#vii.lxxiv-p11.1
4558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=51#vii.lxxiv-p37.1
4559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.v.xlv-p5.1
4560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.v.xviii-p20.1
4561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.v.xviii-p6.1
4562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.vii.xi-p7.1
4563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vi.v.lxviii-p3.1
4564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii.lxxv-p3.2
4565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv-p21.4
4566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.lxxviii-p20.1
4567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii.lxxv-p10.1
4568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi.v.xlv-p5.1
4569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi.v.xviii-p23.1
4570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vi.vii.xi-p9.1
4571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vi.v.xix-p3.1
4572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii.iv-p50.1
4573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii.xix-p11.1
4574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=24#vi.vii.v-p5.1
4575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=25#vii.lii-p8.1
4576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#v.ii.viii-p5.2
4577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p44.1
4578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p83.1
4579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p109.1
4580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii.xxiii-p129.1
4581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.xliii-p34.1
4582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.xliii-p39.1
4583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.xcvi-p16.1
4584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.xlviii-p27.1
4585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vii.lxxx-p30.1
4586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vi.v.xlv-p5.1
4587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vi.v.xix-p3.1
4588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=34#v.ii.vi-p14.1
4589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxi-p13.1
4590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#vi.v.xix-p7.1
4591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vi.v.xlvi-p9.1
4592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=5#vi.v.xlvi-p9.1
4593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii.li-p9.1
4594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vii.v-p17.1
4595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vii.xcvii-p45.1
4596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.ii.ii-p11.1
4597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#vii.v-p35.1
4598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=25#vii.liii-p15.1
4599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=27#vii.liii-p16.1
4600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=34#v.ii.ii-p11.1
4601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=34#v.iii.vi-p9.1
4602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=34#vii.lxxxviii-p14.1
4603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=35#vii.liii-p17.1
4604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=38#vii.liii-p18.1
4605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=43#vi.v.xlvi-p9.1
4606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=48#vi.vii.xi-p11.1
4607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vi.v.xlvi-p10.1
4608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vii.lxxvi-p12.1
4609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=0#vi.v.xlvi-p11.1
4610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vii.lxxvi-p3.2
4611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vii.lxxvii-p3.2
4612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vii.lxxvii-p14.1
4613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.lxxvii-p63.1
4614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vi.vii.xi-p14.1
4615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.xxiii-p122.1
4616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.lxxvii-p26.1
4617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.lxxvii-p37.1
4618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vi.vii.xi-p13.1
4619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#vii.lxxvii-p17.1
4620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vi.iv.iv-p10.1
4621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vi.vii.xi-p15.1
4622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vii.xxiii-p123.1
4623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vii.lxxviii-p3.2
4624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vii.lxxviii-p31.1
4625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vii.lxxxvii-p13.1
4626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#v.ii.viii-p5.1
4627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vii.l-p5.1
4628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vii.lxxxvii-p20.1
4629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#v.ii.xi-p4.1
4630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=24#vii.lxxix-p13.1
4631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=25#vi.v.xiii-p11.1
4632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=25#vii.lxxix-p3.2
4633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=28#vii.lxxix-p41.1
4634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=28#vii.xlv-p35.1
4635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=29#vi.v.xxxi-p18.1
4636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=29#vii.lxxix-p44.1
4637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=30#vii.lxxxviii-p14.1
4638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=31#vii.lxxx-p3.2
4639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=31#vii.lxxx-p5.1
4640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=33#vii.xix-p47.1
4641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=33#vii.lxxx-p8.1
4642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=35#vi.vii.xi-p33.1
4643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=35#vii.lxxx-p8.1
4644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=35#vii.lxxxv-p33.1
4645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#vii.lxxxi-p3.2
4646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#vii.lxxxi-p5.1
4647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=43#vii.lxxxi-p6.1
4648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=43#vii.lxxxi-p34.1
4649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=44#vii.lxxxi-p7.1
4650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=45#vii.lxxxi-p8.1
4651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=46#vii.lxxxi-p44.1
4652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=46#vii.lxxxii-p6.1
4653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vi.vi.xxvi-p51.1
4654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p55.1
4655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vi.v.xlvii-p5.1
4656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=6#v.iii.ix-p9.1
4657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vi.v.xlvii-p8.1
4658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.lxxxii-p3.2
4659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=15#vi.vii.xi-p17.1
4660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=15#vi.v.xlviii-p6.1
4661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=22#vi.v.xlix-p4.1
4662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=26#vi.vii.xi-p19.1
4663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=27#v.iii.vii-p5.1
4664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=32#vi.vi.ii-p6.1
4665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=35#vii.xii-p47.1
4666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=38#v.iii.vi-p10.1
4667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=38#vii.lxxxviii-p14.1
4668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=41#v.iii.vii-p5.1
4669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=41#vii.v-p18.1
4670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=41#vii.lviii-p16.1
4671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=41#vii.lxxxii-p8.1
4672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=42#vi.v.xliii-p7.1
4673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#vii.lxxxiii-p13.1
4674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=45#v.iii.vi-p4.1
4675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=45#v.iii.x-p5.1
4676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=51#vii.xxxv-p15.1
4677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=51#vii.xxxvii-p19.1
4678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=51#vii.lxiv-p22.1
4679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=53#vii.lxxxiii-p3.2
4680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=53#vii.lxxxiii-p7.1
4681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=55#vii.lxxxiv-p3.2
4682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=55#vii.lxxxiv-p6.1
4683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=56#vii.xxiii-p62.1
4684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=56#vii.lxxxiv-p10.1
4685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=60#vii.lxxxiii-p8.1
4686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=61#vii.lxxxiii-p9.1
4687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=63#vi.vii.xi-p20.1
4688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=63#vii.lxxxiii-p10.1
4689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=65#vii.lxxxiii-p12.1
4690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=2#vii.lxxxv-p6.1
4691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=3#vii.lxxxv-p8.1
4692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=5#vii.lxxxv-p9.1
4693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=6#vii.lxxxv-p3.2
4694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=6#vi.vii.xi-p23.1
4695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=6#vii.lxxxv-p11.1
4696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=8#vii.lxxxv-p41.1
4697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii.lxxxv-p12.1
4698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=10#vii.lxxxv-p43.1
4699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=12#v.ii.v-p16.1
4700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=17#v.ii.xiii-p5.1
4701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=20#vii.xxiii-p180.1
4702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vii.lxxxv-p44.1
4703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=28#vi.vii.xi-p27.1
4704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=28#vi.vii.xi-p28.1
4705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=34#vi.vii.xi-p26.1
4706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=36#vii.lxxxi-p21.1
4707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=11#v.ii.xvi-p4.1
4708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=12#v.ii.vi-p7.1
4709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vii.xcii-p6.1
4710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=25#vi.vii.xi-p31.2
4711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=31#vii.lxxxvi-p3.2
4712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=31#vii.lxxxvi-p5.1
4713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=31#vi.v.lxxi-p20.1
4714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=32#vii.lxxxvi-p6.1
4715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=33#vii.lxxxvi-p12.1
4716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=34#vii.lxxxvi-p14.1
4717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=36#vi.vii.xi-p35.1
4718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=39#vii.lxxiii-p17.1
4719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#vii.liii-p27.1
4720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=48#v.ii.v-p14.1
4721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=48#vii.xxiii-p180.1
4722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=56#vi.vii.xi-p25.1
4723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#vii.lxxiii-p10.1
4724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=0#vii.lxxviii-p45.1
4725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=2#vii.lxxxviii-p5.1
4726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=3#vii.lxxxviii-p6.1
4727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii.lxxxvii-p3.2
4728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii.lxxxvii-p6.1
4729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vii.lxxxvii-p5.1
4730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vii.lxxxviii-p13.1
4731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=16#vii.lxxiv-p15.1
4732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=16#vii.lxxxviii-p19.1
4733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=24#vii.lxxxviii-p18.1
4734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=31#vii.lxxxvii-p22.1
4735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=31#vii.lxxxviii-p8.1
4736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=35#vii.lxxxvii-p27.1
4737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=35#vii.lxxxviii-p11.1
4738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=37#vii.lxxxviii-p12.1
4739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=37#vii.lxxxvii-p28.1
4740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=39#vi.vi.xiv-p37.1
4741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=39#vii.lxxxviii-p21.1
4742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vi.v.lxiii-p3.3
4743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vii.lxxxix-p3.1
4744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=1#vii.lxxxix-p12.1
4745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=1#vii.lxxxix-p21.1
4746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vii.lxxxix-p20.1
4747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=7#vii.lxxxix-p8.1
4748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=7#vii.xciv-p23.1
4749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#vii.lxxxix-p8.1
4750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#vii.lxxxix-p19.1
4751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#vii.xc-p5.1
4752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=12#vii.lxxxix-p22.1
4753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=12#vii.lxxxix-p56.1
4754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=12#vii.xc-p6.1
4755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vii.xc-p3.2
4756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=15#v.ii.xv-p13.1
4757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vi.vi.v-p18.1
4758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.xxix-p38.1
4759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.xl-p35.1
4760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.lxxxix-p26.1
4761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.xc-p20.1
4762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#vii.iv-p53.1
4763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#vii.lxxiv-p24.1
4764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=24#vi.vii.xi-p37.1
4765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vi.iv.iv-p7.1
4766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vi.vii.xi-p6.1
4767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vi.vii.xi-p38.1
4768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii.xliii-p16.1
4769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii.lxxviii-p54.1
4770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii.xci-p3.2
4771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii.xci-p5.1
4772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii.xcii-p14.1
4773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vi.v.lxiii-p3.3
4774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vii.lxxviii-p44.1
4775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxx-p5.1
4776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=11#vii.l-p22.1
4777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=17#vii.xix-p12.1
4778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vi.vii.xi-p39.1
4779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=33#v.ii.xii-p13.1
4780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=38#vii.l-p29.1
4781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=39#vii.l-p26.1
4782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=39#vii.l-p28.1
4783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=43#vii.xix-p14.1
4784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=43#vii.lxxx-p55.1
4785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=44#vii.xix-p18.1
4786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=44#vii.l-p30.1
4787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=49#vi.v.lxxi-p9.1
4788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=55#vi.v.lxxix-p5.1
4789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=55#vi.v.lxxix-p8.1
4790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxix-p5.1
4791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxix-p7.1
4792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxix-p10.1
4793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxx-p6.1
4794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=1#vi.vii.xi-p40.1
4795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=3#vii.lxiv-p18.1
4796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=6#v.iii.xvii-p10.1
4797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=14#vi.v.lxvii-p8.1
4798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=20#vi.v.lxxvii-p6.1
4799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=20#vi.vii.xi-p42.1
4800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=25#v.iii.xv-p6.1
4801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#v.iii.xiv-p5.1
4802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#vii.xxiii-p95.1
4803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#vii.xcv-p26.1
4804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=37#vi.iv.xxxi-p15.1
4805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=44#vii.xcii-p3.2
4806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=44#vii.xcii-p5.1
4807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=46#vii.xcii-p6.1
4808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=49#vii.xcii-p11.1
4809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=50#vii.xcii-p19.1
4810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=0#vi.v.xlvi-p11.1
4811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxix-p5.1
4812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vi.v.lxxxi-p16.2
4813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii.lv-p32.1
4814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=2#vi.vi.ii-p16.1
4815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=2#vii.xix-p22.1
4816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=5#vi.vii.xi-p67.1
4817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=10#vii.xlii-p14.1
4818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=21#vi.vi.ii-p7.1
4819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=21#vi.v.lxxxi-p15.1
4820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#vi.iv.iv-p11.1
4821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#vii.lxxi-p6.1
4822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#vii.lxxxv-p31.1
4823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#vii.lxxxvii-p36.1
4824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#vi.vi.ii-p14.1
4825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=25#vii.lxxi-p7.1
4826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=27#vi.v.lxxxi-p16.2
4827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=28#vi.vi.ii-p18.1
4828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=33#vi.vi.iii-p7.1
4829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=33#vi.vi.iii-p3.1
4830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#vii.lxxvii-p61.1
4831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#vii.lxxviii-p65.1
4832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=37#vi.vi.iii-p8.1
4833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=37#vii.xcix-p5.1
4834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=0#vi.vi.iv-p7.2
4835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=1#vi.vi.iv-p3.1
4836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.xvi-p13.1
4837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.lxxx-p6.1
4838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.lxxxvi-p30.1
4839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.xciii-p3.2
4840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.xciii-p5.1
4841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.xciv-p3.2
4842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.xciv-p5.1
4843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.xciv-p22.1
4844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=8#vii.xl-p15.1
4845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=8#vii.lxxvii-p21.1
4846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=8#vii.lxxvii-p68.1
4847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=8#vii.lxxviii-p60.1
4848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=8#vii.xcvii-p46.1
4849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vi.vii.xi-p43.1
4850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vii.xl-p16.1
4851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vii.lxxvii-p22.1
4852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vii.xcvii-p47.1
4853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#vi.iv.iv-p8.1
4854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#vii.iv-p55.1
4855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#vii.xxiii-p121.1
4856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#vii.xxiii-p131.1
4857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#vii.xl-p17.1
4858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=12#v.ii.viii-p5.2
4859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#vi.vi.xxvi-p82.1
4860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#vi.vii.xi-p65.1
4861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#vii.xxx-p27.1
4862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#vii.lxxviii-p59.1
4863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#vii.lxxviii-p64.1
4864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#vii.lxxix-p35.1
4865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vi.vi.xxvi-p36.1
4866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=26#vii.xxiii-p168.1
4867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#vii.xliii-p15.1
4868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#v.iii.xiv-p5.1
4869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#vii.lxxiii-p6.1
4870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#vii.lxxxvi-p18.1
4871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#vii.lxxxvi-p23.1
4872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#vii.lxxxvi-p29.1
4873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=1#vii.xxxix-p10.1
4874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=1#vii.lxv-p28.1
4875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=2#vii.lxv-p30.1
4876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#vii.xxxix-p10.1
4877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#vii.xli-p16.1
4878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#vii.liii-p21.1
4879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#vii.liii-p31.1
4880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#vii.xcvi-p20.1
4881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=6#vii.lxv-p30.1
4882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=16#v.iii.xxi-p5.1
4883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=18#vii.xlviii-p26.1
4884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vii.xxiii-p37.1
4885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vii.xxiii-p114.1
4886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vii.xcv-p11.1
4887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=24#vii.xxiii-p124.1
4888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=24#vii.xxiii-p133.1
4889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#vi.vi.xxvi-p36.1
4890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#vii.xxiii-p149.1
4891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#vii.xcv-p3.2
4892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#vii.xcv-p21.1
4893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=7#vii.xcv-p7.1
4894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vii.xcvi-p3.2
4895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vii.xcvi-p5.1
4896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#vii.xxiii-p115.1
4897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vii.xcvi-p6.1
4898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#v.iii.xx-p3.1
4899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#vi.vii.xi-p55.1
4900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=15#vii.xxviii-p17.1
4901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=15#vii.lxxxvii-p8.1
4902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=24#vii.xcvii-p3.2
4903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=24#vii.xcvii-p7.1
4904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=24#vii.xcvii-p42.1
4905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=24#vii.xcvii-p44.1
4906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=33#vii.iii-p16.1
4907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=33#vii.xlix-p17.1
4908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#vii.lxxix-p38.1
4909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=10#vii.lxxxvii-p11.1
4910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=22#vi.iv.iv-p9.1
4911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=22#vii.lv-p20.1
4912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#vii.lxxxvii-p19.1
4913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=25#vi.vi.iv-p4.1
4914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=0#vi.iv.xxxi-p11.1
4915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=1#vi.vi.v-p6.1
4916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=3#vi.vi.xxvi-p87.1
4917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=4#vi.vi.vi-p5.1
4918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=11#vi.vi.vi-p9.1
4919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=12#vi.vi.vii-p6.1
4920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=13#vi.vi.vii-p4.1
4921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vi.vi.vii-p10.1
4922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=17#vi.vi.vii-p30.1
4923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=18#vi.vi.vii-p31.1
4924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=19#vi.vi.vii-p11.1
4925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=19#vi.vi.vii-p33.1
4926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=23#v.ii.xix-p19.1
4927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=24#vi.vi.vii-p35.2
4928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=25#vi.vi.vii-p36.1
4929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=26#vi.vi.vii-p42.1
4930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=28#vi.v.lxxxi-p16.2
4931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=28#vi.vi.viii-p9.1
4932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=28#vi.vi.ix-p18.1
4933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=29#vi.vi.xiv-p13.1
4934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=31#vi.vi.ix-p19.1
4935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=35#vi.vi.ix-p20.1
4936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=36#vi.vii.xi-p18.1
4937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=36#vi.vii.xi-p44.1
4938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=37#vi.vi.ix-p21.1
4939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=0#vi.iv.xxxi-p11.1
4940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=1#vi.vi.x-p5.1
4941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=2#vi.vi.ix-p24.1
4942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=4#vi.vi.xiv-p22.1
4943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=6#vi.vi.xiv-p23.1
4944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=6#vi.vi.xiv-p24.1
4945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=8#vi.vi.ix-p22.1
4946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=12#vi.vi.xiv-p25.1
4947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=13#vi.vi.ix-p23.1
4948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=13#vi.vi.xiv-p5.1
4949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=15#vi.vi.xiv-p26.1
4950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=15#vi.vi.xiv-p27.1
4951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=16#vi.vi.xi-p6.1
4952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=18#vi.vi.xv-p5.1
4953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=19#vi.iv.iii-p4.1
4954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=23#vi.vi.xiv-p12.1
4955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=23#vi.vi.xiii-p6.1
4956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=25#vi.vi.xxii-p6.1
4957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=28#vi.vi.xviii-p12.1
4958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=30#vi.vi.xix-p6.1
4959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=31#vi.v.lxxxi-p16.2
4960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=37#vii.lxxix-p28.1
4961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=38#vi.vi.xxiii-p7.1
4962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=39#vi.vi.xxiv-p7.1
4963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=40#vi.vi.xxiv-p8.1
4964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=41#vi.vi.xxv-p44.1
4965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=1#vi.vi.xxv-p40.1
4966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=9#vi.vi.xxv-p43.1
4967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=13#vi.vi.xxv-p46.1
4968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=13#vi.vi.xxv-p48.1
4969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=14#vi.vi.xxvi-p62.1
4970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vi.vii.xi-p46.1
4971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#vii.xcv-p23.1
4972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=18#vi.vi.xxv-p51.1
4973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=19#vi.vi.xxvi-p31.1
4974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=19#vi.vi.xxvi-p66.1
4975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=20#vi.vi.xxvi-p34.1
4976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#vi.vi.ii-p17.1
4977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#vi.vii.xi-p47.1
4978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#vii.li-p28.1
4979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#vii.xxiii-p82.1
4980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#vii.xxiii-p110.1
4981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=23#vi.v.lxii-p6.1
4982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=23#vii.li-p29.1
4983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=25#vii.lxiv-p15.1
4984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=26#vi.vi.xxvi-p67.1
4985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=26#vi.vi.xxvi-p39.1
4986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#vii.lxiv-p23.1
4987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=28#vii.xl-p9.1
4988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#vii.xl-p8.1
4989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#vii.lxiv-p16.1
4990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#vii.xcv-p17.1
4991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vi.vi.xxvi-p68.1
4992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vi.vii.x-p4.1
4993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=3#vi.v.xviii-p34.1
4994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=14#vi.vi.xxvi-p60.1
4995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#vii.lxxxix-p9.1
4996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#vii.xc-p15.1
4997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#vii.xcviii-p5.1
4998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#vii.xcix-p3.2
4999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#vii.xcix-p9.1
5000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#vi.vi.iii-p6.1
5001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=16#vii.lxxxix-p48.1
5002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=16#vii.xcviii-p3.2
5003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=17#vii.xc-p41.1
5004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=18#vii.xcix-p11.1
5005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=19#vii.xcix-p12.1
5006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=23#vi.vii.xi-p49.1
5007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=24#vi.v.xiii-p9.1
5008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=25#vi.vi.xxvi-p74.1
5009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=25#vi.vii.ix-p8.1
5010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=25#vii.l-p12.1
5011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vi.vii.ix-p7.1
5012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=2#vi.vi.xxvi-p37.1
5013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.v.v-p12.1
5014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.vi.xxvi-p75.1
5015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.iii-p160.1
5016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vi.vi.xxvi-p47.1
5017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p87.1
5018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vii.xlv-p31.1
5019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.lxxix-p29.1
5020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii.xxxix-p26.1
5021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii.iii-p60.1
5022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=15#vii.li-p38.1
5023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=25#vii.lxxvii-p34.1
5024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=26#vi.vi.xxvi-p12.1
5025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.ii.xx-p14.1
5026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii.xxiii-p89.1
5027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii.xxiii-p140.1
5028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vii.xxxix-p27.1
5029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vii.xli-p9.1
5030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=37#vii.xli-p11.1
5031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=37#vii.xxiii-p167.1
5032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=38#vii.xxix-p21.1
5033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=0#v.iii.ii-p5.1
5034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=0#v.iii.ii-p5.1
5035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=26#vi.vi.xvii-p10.1
5036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=32#vii.xxiii-p179.1
5037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=32#vii.xxix-p23.1
5038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=32#vii.lv-p21.1
5039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=32#vii.lxviii-p26.1
5040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=32#vii.xc-p34.1
5041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=6#vii.iii-p155.1
5042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#vii.xlii-p53.1
5043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=58#vii.lxviii-p25.1
5044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=59#vii.xlii-p55.1
5045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=60#v.ii.xxii-p8.1
5046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=60#vii.viii-p57.1
5047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=60#vii.xlii-p56.1
5048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vii.li-p33.1
5049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=13#vii.xxiii-p59.1
5050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=14#vii.li-p34.1
5051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=17#vii.li-p35.1
5052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=19#vii.li-p36.1
5053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=28#vii.li-p39.1
5054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=29#vii.li-p40.1
5055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=36#vii.li-p41.1
5056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=1#vii.xxix-p14.1
5057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=1#vi.iv.x-p7.1
5058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vi.vii.vi-p11.1
5059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii.xxxix-p46.1
5060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii.xli-p40.1
5061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii.lxviii-p28.1
5062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii.lxxiv-p40.1
5063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii.lxxv-p14.1
5064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii.lxxxv-p47.1
5065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=15#vii.xxix-p28.1
5066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=13#vii.lxxvii-p54.1
5067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=25#vii.li-p44.1
5068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=41#vi.vi.xxvi-p76.1
5069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=44#vii.li-p45.1
5070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=27#v.iii.xvii-p16.1
5071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#vii.iii-p61.1
5072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=46#vii.xli-p19.1
5073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=14&scrV=22#vi.v.v-p4.1
5074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii.v-p43.1
5075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii.v-p48.1
5076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii.lviii-p6.1
5077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=18#vii.liii-p10.1
5078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=28#vii.xx-p20.1
5079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=18&scrV=2#v.iii.xvii-p21.1
5080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=34#v.iii.iii-p10.3
5081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=20&scrV=34#v.iii.xvi-p8.1
5082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=3#vi.v.xviii-p21.1
5083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=22&scrV=25#v.ii.xix-p13.1
5084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=3#v.ii.xix-p15.1
5085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=23&scrV=8#vii.xxiii-p22.1
5086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=24&scrV=25#vii.lx-p16.1
5087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=28&scrV=10#v.iii.xvii-p17.1
5088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.vi-p11.1
5089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vi.v.iii-p3.1
5090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.iii-p87.1
5091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#vii.iv-p43.1
5092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.xix-p35.3
5093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=9#v.ii.xvii-p7.1
5094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#v.ii.v-p7.1
5095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#vii.xcv-p24.1
5096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.xx-p14.1
5097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.xciii-p7.1
5098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii.xx-p15.1
5099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii.xciii-p9.1
5100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.iv-p59.1
5101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.xx-p16.1
5102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.lxxviii-p14.1
5103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.xciii-p10.1
5104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.xix-p42.1
5105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=21#vii.xciii-p13.1
5106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vii.xix-p41.1
5107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vii.xciii-p14.1
5108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vii.v-p29.1
5109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii.xciii-p16.1
5110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vii.ix-p32.1
5111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vi.vi.xiv-p41.1
5112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=1#v.ii.xvi-p14.1
5113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#v.iii.xiv-p10.1
5114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vii.xxiii-p98.1
5115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vii.xxxiii-p8.1
5116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.iii-p130.1
5117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=14#v.iii.ix-p20.1
5118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.xxvi-p10.1
5119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=3#vii.xcv-p15.1
5120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vii.lxxxv-p36.1
5121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vii.xcix-p7.1
5122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii.li-p13.1
5123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vii.xxx-p16.1
5124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vii.lxxvii-p52.1
5125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=23#vii.xxxii-p15.1
5126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=23#vii.xcv-p12.1
5127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=23#vii.xcvi-p8.1
5128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.lxxxiii-p46.1
5129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=15#vii.lxxvii-p9.1
5130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vii.xxi-p14.1
5131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#vii.iii-p163.1
5132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#vii.xcvi-p25.1
5133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.ii.v-p6.1
5134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=3#v.iii.xvii-p23.1
5135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vi.iv.xxxv-p3.1
5136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p75.1
5137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p92.1
5138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii.lvii-p15.1
5139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii.lxxx-p16.1
5140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii.xcvii-p26.1
5141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xxiv-p7.1
5142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xciv-p25.1
5143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=10#v.ii.xi-p21.1
5144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#vii.lxvii-p27.1
5145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#vii.xcvi-p8.1
5146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vi.iv.xxxii-p3.1
5147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii.xxiii-p39.1
5148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii.lxvii-p30.1
5149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii.lxxvii-p8.1
5150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.xl-p6.1
5151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.xl-p33.1
5152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.lx-p6.1
5153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=12#v.ii.xxii-p21.1
5154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.lxxx-p32.1
5155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.lxxx-p48.1
5156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=2#v.ii.xiv-p6.1
5157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vii.lxxxviii-p30.1
5158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vii.xcvii-p14.1
5159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vii.xcvii-p29.1
5160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=8#vii.xcvii-p16.1
5161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=11#vii.xcvii-p17.1
5162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=12#vii.xcvii-p18.1
5163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=13#vii.xcvii-p16.1
5164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=13#vii.xcvii-p20.1
5165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=17#vii.lxxx-p50.1
5166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=18#v.iii.vi-p18.1
5167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=19#vii.lxxx-p28.1
5168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=22#v.iii.vi-p18.1
5169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vii.x-p17.1
5170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vii.lxxvii-p11.1
5171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vii.ix-p17.1
5172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#vii.xcvii-p15.1
5173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#vii.xcvii-p28.1
5174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#v.iii.xi-p10.1
5175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vii.xcvii-p31.1
5176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#v.ii.xii-p16.1
5177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vii.lxxvii-p12.1
5178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vii.lxxvii-p38.1
5179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=24#vii.xcvii-p35.1
5180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=25#v.iii.vi-p16.1
5181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=25#vii.viii-p28.1
5182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vi.v.v-p23.1
5183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vii.xxi-p23.1
5184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vii.lxxxvi-p19.1
5185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#vii.lxxxviii-p34.1
5186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=4#vii.lxxxvi-p20.1
5187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#vii.xxiii-p152.1
5188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vi.vii.xi-p56.1
5189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=13#vii.lxxx-p35.1
5190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=13#vii.lxxx-p39.1
5191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.iii.xi-p12.1
5192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#vi.vi.v-p15.1
5193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#vii.xxiii-p142.1
5194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#v.iii.iv-p11.1
5195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=16#vii.xxiii-p145.1
5196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=17#v.ii.xxiii-p5.1
5197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=18#vii.xxii-p13.1
5198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vii.iii-p134.1
5199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=24#v.iii.ix-p33.1
5200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=24#vii.xlviii-p29.1
5201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=24#vii.lvii-p26.1
5202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#v.iii.xii-p6.1
5203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=32#vii.iv-p46.1
5204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=32#vii.xciv-p27.1
5205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#vii.xxvii-p13.1
5206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=35#v.ii.iii-p5.1
5207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=37#vii.lxxx-p19.1
5208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=3#vii.iii-p135.1
5209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#vii.iii-p89.1
5210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#vii.xiv-p41.1
5211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=14#vii.v-p70.1
5212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=20#vi.vi.xiv-p39.1
5213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=21#vi.vi.xiv-p38.1
5214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=33#vii.xcv-p13.1
5215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vii.lxxxi-p13.1
5216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vii.lxxxiii-p53.1
5217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vii.lxxxi-p32.1
5218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vii.vi-p23.1
5219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vii.lxxxi-p14.1
5220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#vii.lxxxiii-p54.1
5221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=6#vii.xcv-p19.1
5222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=13#vii.viii-p8.1
5223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=13#vii.ix-p5.1
5224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=13#vii.lxvii-p8.1
5225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vii.x-p5.1
5226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vii.xi-p5.1
5227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vii.lxvii-p9.1
5228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vii.ix-p6.1
5229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vi.iv.xxxi-p15.1
5230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vii.lxxiv-p27.1
5231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vii.iii-p57.1
5232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vii.lii-p19.1
5233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=5#vii.lii-p22.1
5234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=5#vii.lxxxiii-p46.1
5235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=17#vii.xxix-p55.1
5236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=17#v.iii.xiv-p11.1
5237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=20#v.ii.iv-p4.1
5238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=20#vii.lxxxiii-p20.1
5239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii.lxxxviii-p25.1
5240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii.xc-p26.1
5241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=34#vi.vi.xiv-p40.1
5242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=34#vii.v-p67.1
5243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=35#vii.lxii-p22.1
5244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=3#vii.lvii-p13.1
5245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=11#vii.xxiii-p91.1
5246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=14#v.ii.xxi-p13.1
5247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=14#v.ii.xxii-p18.1
5248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=16#vii.liii-p33.1
5249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=17#v.ii.xxii-p18.1
5250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=21#v.ii.ii-p5.1
5251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii.xiv-p50.1
5252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=10#v.ii.v-p8.1
5253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=10#v.iii.xiii-p13.1
5254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=10#vii.lxxvii-p57.1
5255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=3#v.iii.xviii-p7.1
5256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vi.vii.xi-p62.1
5257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=1#vii.xxviii-p19.1
5258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=16#vi.iv.xxxi-p13.1
5259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=20#vii.liii-p20.1
5260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=21#vi.iv.xxxi-p13.1
5261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=33#v.ii.ii-p20.3
5262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.xxix-p13.1
5263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.lv-p18.1
5264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.lix-p12.1
5265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii.xxviii-p9.1
5266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii.lix-p13.1
5267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii.xxviii-p10.1
5268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii.xxviii-p25.1
5269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#vii.xx-p6.1
5270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=23#vii.xii-p20.1
5271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vii.v-p32.1
5272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vii.iii-p27.1
5273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=27#vii.xxxix-p39.1
5274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vii.xxxix-p24.1
5275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vii.xliii-p6.1
5276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vii.xc-p27.1
5277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.ii.iv-p6.1
5278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.lxxix-p3.4
5279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.lxxix-p5.1
5280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.lxxix-p32.1
5281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vii.lxxx-p36.1
5282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.xxiii-p155.1
5283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.ii.xvii-p14.1
5284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.iii.xx-p4.1
5285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii.xxiii-p156.1
5286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vii.xxiii-p157.1
5287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vii.liii-p7.1
5288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vii.xxxiii-p16.1
5289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vii.lvi-p18.1
5290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#vii.xcvii-p43.1
5291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=11#vii.lxviii-p24.1
5292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.xxiii-p160.1
5293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.li-p30.1
5294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.xxxiv-p40.1
5295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.ii.x-p7.1
5296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.iii.v-p6.1
5297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.v-p34.1
5298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi.v.xxxi-p24.1
5299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii.xxv-p24.1
5300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii.lxxxix-p65.1
5301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.iii.xviii-p10.1
5302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p104.1
5303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii.xix-p27.1
5304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii.xxiii-p13.1
5305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii.xlv-p55.1
5306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii.xcvii-p25.1
5307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=9#vii.iii-p13.1
5308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=11#vii.xiv-p30.1
5309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=12#v.ii.xx-p23.2
5310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=12#vii.lvii-p56.1
5311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#vii.li-p47.1
5312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#vii.liii-p47.1
5313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#vii.lxxxi-p39.1
5314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vii.lxxxix-p51.1
5315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=21#vi.v.xxxi-p27.1
5316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.ii.xx-p17.1
5317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=12#v.iii.xviii-p6.1
5318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=12#vii.xiv-p45.1
5319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=9#v.iii.xxv-p11.1
5320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vi.v.v-p28.1
5321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii.xxxiv-p42.1
5322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii.li-p31.1
5323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=20#vii.lxxiii-p24.1
5324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=4#vii.iii-p128.1
5325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=5#vii.iii-p110.1
5326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=6#vii.iii-p109.1
5327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=10#v.ii.xiv-p9.1
5328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=11#v.ii.xvi-p22.5
5329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.ii.xvi-p9.1
5330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=14#v.ii.xxii-p5.1
5331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#v.ii.xiv-p10.1
5332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#vii.iii-p99.1
5333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=29#vii.lxxvii-p43.1
5334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=35#vii.xxxviii-p39.1
5335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#v.ii.i-p17.1
5336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vii.xiv-p3.4
5337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vii.xiv-p40.1
5338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=10#vii.xiv-p31.1
5339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vii.xxxiv-p12.1
5340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=12#vii.xiv-p32.1
5341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=7#vi.v.xxxi-p29.1
5342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=11#vii.lv-p25.1
5343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=11#vi.v.xxxi-p30.1
5344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=13#vi.v.xxxi-p33.1
5345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=13#v.iii.xvi-p13.1
5346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=19#v.iii.xix-p9.1
5347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=26#v.ii.vi-p17.1
5348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=26#v.ii.xxii-p22.1
5349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#v.iii.xxv-p23.1
5350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#vii.lxxxi-p41.1
5351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#vii.xci-p12.1
5352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=12#vii.xxv-p21.1
5353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=12#vii.xl-p75.1
5354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.iii.ix-p29.1
5355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#vii.xxii-p18.1
5356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=17#vi.vi.xxvi-p21.1
5357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=20#vi.iv.xv-p5.2
5358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=20#vii.xiv-p43.1
5359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=24#vii.xxx-p31.1
5360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=32#v.iii.i-p11.1
5361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=33#vii.vi-p14.1
5362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=33#vii.vi-p25.1
5363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=33#vii.vi-p26.1
5364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=33#vii.xxx-p32.1
5365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vii.li-p47.1
5366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vii.liii-p47.1
5367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=1#vii.lxxxi-p39.1
5368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#v.ii.xii-p8.1
5369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#v.iii.xii-p11.1
5370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vii.xvi-p14.1
5371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vii.xli-p39.1
5372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=19#vii.iii-p49.1
5373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=26#vii.iii-p162.1
5374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#vii.xxiii-p63.1
5375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#vii.xlii-p9.1
5376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#vii.lxiv-p19.1
5377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#vii.lxxxiv-p5.1
5378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#v.iii.xxv-p6.1
5379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=8#vi.vii.xi-p61.1
5380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#vi.v.xxii-p8.1
5381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#vii.xxiii-p130.1
5382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vii.lxxxv-p48.1
5383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=12#vii.xc-p18.1
5384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=27#vii.xiv-p22.1
5385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=27#vii.xliii-p35.1
5386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=27#vii.xcvi-p19.1
5387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=29#vii.xlii-p31.1
5388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=31#vii.xlv-p18.1
5389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii.xlii-p34.1
5390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii.xlv-p19.1
5391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii.xlvii-p32.1
5392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii.xc-p10.1
5393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii.xciv-p44.1
5394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii.xcvii-p23.1
5395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii.xl-p79.1
5396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#vii.lxxvii-p60.1
5397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vii.xlii-p36.1
5398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vii.xciv-p40.1
5399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=5#vii.iii-p171.1
5400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=5#vii.xxx-p30.1
5401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=6#v.iii.xxv-p7.1
5402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=8#vii.xlv-p21.1
5403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=9#vi.vii.xi-p60.1
5404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=10#vi.vii.xi-p60.1
5405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#vi.iv.v-p6.1
5406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#vi.vii.xi-p52.1
5407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#vi.vii.xi-p60.1
5408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#vii.v-p26.1
5409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#vii.xxx-p24.1
5410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#vii.lxix-p19.1
5411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#vii.lxxiv-p33.1
5412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=13#vii.lvii-p16.1
5413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=15#vii.xxiii-p49.1
5414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=20#vi.v.xxxi-p23.1
5415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=3#vi.vi.xxvi-p4.1
5416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=4#vi.vi.xxvi-p78.1
5417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=6#vi.v.lxxi-p14.1
5418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=6#vii.iii-p59.1
5419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=6#vii.xxix-p19.1
5420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii.xiv-p28.1
5421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii.xxviii-p30.1
5422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii.xxix-p18.1
5423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii.xxix-p37.1
5424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii.xxx-p13.1
5425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=9#vii.liii-p8.1
5426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#vii.liii-p6.1
5427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vii.xl-p24.1
5428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=22#vii.xlii-p43.1
5429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=25#v.ii.xi-p13.1
5430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#vii.vii-p17.1
5431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=31#v.ii.xvii-p8.1
5432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=32#vii.lxiv-p25.1
5433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=33#vii.xiv-p39.1
5434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=41#vii.lxxxiv-p18.1
5435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=42#v.iii.vi-p17.1
5436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=43#vii.lxviii-p10.1
5437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=52#vii.xlv-p34.1
5438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=53#vii.lxxx-p43.1
5439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=53#v.ii.xv-p9.1
5440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=54#vii.viii-p29.1
5441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=54#vii.lxxxiii-p41.1
5442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=55#v.iii.vi-p17.1
5443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=16&scrV=1#v.iii.xvii-p13.1
5444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii.vi-p16.1
5445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii.xliii-p20.1
5446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#vii.xlv-p37.1
5447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii.xxvii-p29.1
5448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vi.vi.xiv-p36.1
5449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p5.1
5450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vii.lxxxviii-p31.1
5451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.xxvi-p24.1
5452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vii.xxvi-p22.1
5453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.iii-p31.1
5454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.xxvi-p23.1
5455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.lxxxix-p32.1
5456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=18#v.iii.xii-p14.1
5457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vii.vi-p12.1
5458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vi.vi.xiv-p35.1
5459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii.iii-p7.1
5460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vii.lxxx-p17.1
5461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#vii.xxii-p16.1
5462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=18#vii.lvii-p27.1
5463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vii.x-p67.1
5464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vii.xlii-p25.1
5465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vi.vii.xi-p64.1
5466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.iii-p161.1
5467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xl-p20.1
5468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vi.vii.xi-p54.1
5469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.v-p25.1
5470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xliii-p44.1
5471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.lxxix-p16.1
5472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=10#v.ii.xi-p16.1
5473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=10#v.ii.vi-p12.1
5474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.xl-p61.1
5475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.xcv-p18.1
5476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.xxvi-p22.1
5477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vii.xxxiii-p19.1
5478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vii.xlviii-p25.1
5479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vii.lxxiii-p7.1
5480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vii.vi-p22.1
5481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vii.lxxxvi-p22.1
5482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=21#vii.xcvi-p26.1
5483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vii.xxii-p8.1
5484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.xxxvii-p14.1
5485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=13#vii.xcii-p22.1
5486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=10#v.ii.ii-p9.1
5487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=9#vii.lxiv-p34.1
5488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=21#vii.vi-p13.1
5489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=7#v.ii.xx-p22.1
5490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#vii.xlv-p15.1
5491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#vii.xc-p46.1
5492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#vii.lvii-p20.1
5493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vii.xlv-p16.1
5494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#vii.xc-p47.1
5495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=12#v.iii.xvi-p10.1
5496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=20#v.ii.xix-p11.1
5497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=23#v.iii.xvii-p24.1
5498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=24#vii.xxii-p9.1
5499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=31#v.ii.xvii-p6.1
5500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vi.vii.xi-p63.1
5501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#vii.v-p51.1
5502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#vii.lxix-p16.1
5503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#vii.xxviii-p32.1
5504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=9#vii.xxviii-p33.1
5505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=14#vii.xlii-p61.1
5506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=15#v.ii.xix-p12.1
5507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vii.xxxiv-p27.1
5508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vii.xliv-p8.1
5509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#vii.lxxx-p13.1
5510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vii.xl-p5.1
5511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.lxxxi-p36.1
5512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.ii.vii-p4.1
5513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#v.iii.i-p10.1
5514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.vi-p17.1
5515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.xli-p42.1
5516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=20#v.ii.xvii-p5.1
5517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vii.viii-p15.1
5518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vii.xl-p41.1
5519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=23#v.ii.vii-p9.1
5520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vii.liii-p9.1
5521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=4#vi.v.xxix-p21.1
5522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vii.iv-p47.1
5523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.lxxxiii-p51.1
5524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#v.ii.ix-p13.1
5525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.xl-p30.1
5526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.xxxiii-p42.1
5527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.lvii-p37.1
5528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.lxxxi-p23.1
5529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#vii.xcvi-p21.1
5530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vii.lxxxviii-p28.1
5531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vii.lxxvii-p7.1
5532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=22#vii.lxxxviii-p29.1
5533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=28#v.ii.xv-p5.1
5534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=29#vii.lvii-p38.1
5535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=29#vii.lxxxii-p18.1
5536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=29#vii.xcvi-p22.1
5537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iv-p35.1
5538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=1#v.iii.iv-p11.1
5539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.iii-p79.1
5540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.iv-p41.1
5541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vi.v.iv-p11.1
5542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.iii-p133.1
5543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.iv-p33.1
5544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=5#v.ii.xxiii-p5.1
5545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.iii.xi-p12.1
5546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi.vi.v-p16.1
5547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vii.xxiii-p151.1
5548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=13#v.iii.ix-p6.1
5549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=22#vii.xli-p43.1
5550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=29#vii.xxiii-p164.1
5551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.v-p49.1
5552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xxiii-p60.1
5553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xxxiii-p9.1
5554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xlii-p49.1
5555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xliii-p25.1
5556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.iii.xix-p10.1
5557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vii.lxxvii-p58.1
5558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vii.lxxx-p20.1
5559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=15#vii.lxxx-p23.1
5560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.lxxx-p3.4
5561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.viii-p30.1
5562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.x-p18.1
5563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.lxxx-p25.1
5564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.lxxx-p27.1
5565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=19#v.iii.xxiv-p12.1
5566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii.xli-p12.1
5567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=26#v.ii.vii-p6.1
5568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=0#vi.iii-p7.1
5569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=1#vii.xl-p76.1
5570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=2#vii.xliii-p47.1
5571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=2#vi.v.xxxi-p25.1
5572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=2#vi.v.xxxi-p26.1
5573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=3#vii.xix-p32.1
5574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=4#v.ii.vii-p7.1
5575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=4#vii.vi-p15.1
5576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vii.xl-p48.1
5577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vii.lxviii-p30.1
5578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vii.lxxvii-p51.1
5579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#vii.lxxxiii-p14.1
5580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.lxxviii-p40.1
5581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.xci-p10.1
5582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.v-p24.1
5583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vii.lxxxv-p48.1
5584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii.xxiii-p96.1
5585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii.xcv-p27.1
5586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii.xxiii-p14.1
5587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vii.lxxxiii-p31.1
5588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=11#vi.vi.v-p14.1
5589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.xl-p42.1
5590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.xli-p33.1
5591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vii.xl-p42.1
5592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=14#vii.xxiv-p18.1
5593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#v.ii.x-p8.1
5594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.xxxiii-p40.1
5595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.v-p65.1
5596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.xv-p5.1
5597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.lvii-p21.1
5598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#vii.xxiv-p18.1
5599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=1719#vii.lxix-p43.1
5600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii.xxiii-p147.1
5601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=3#vii.xl-p80.1
5602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vii.lxxx-p15.1
5603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vii.xviii-p10.1
5604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=22#vii.xvi-p12.1
5605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#v.ii.x-p4.1
5606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#vii.x-p38.1
5607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=26#vii.xxvii-p17.1
5608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=27#vii.xix-p23.1
5609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=28#v.iii.xvii-p19.1
5610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=32#vii.xxxv-p19.1
5611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=32#vii.lxvi-p12.1
5612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=1#vii.lxvi-p13.1
5613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.ii.xii-p15.1
5614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.xix-p26.1
5615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.xxviii-p24.1
5616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=11#vii.xl-p73.1
5617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=13#v.iii.xiii-p17.1
5618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vii.xl-p12.1
5619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vii.l-p8.1
5620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=14#vii.lxxix-p22.1
5621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.xxxvi-p8.1
5622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.x-p60.1
5623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#v.ii.xii-p8.1
5624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#vii.iii-p78.1
5625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=23#vii.lxxxiv-p13.1
5626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#vii.iii-p102.1
5627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#v.iii.xii-p10.1
5628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=27#v.iii.xix-p13.1
5629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=31#vii.xliii-p36.1
5630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=31#vii.lxxxi-p20.1
5631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=2#vii.lii-p12.1
5632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii.xlvi-p7.1
5633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#vii.xix-p21.1
5634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vii.xiv-p52.1
5635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=16#vii.lxxxix-p45.1
5636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.lxxxix-p23.1
5637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.lxxxix-p50.1
5638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vii.liii-p49.1
5639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vii.xxiii-p146.1
5640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii.lv-p19.1
5641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii.xcvi-p14.1
5642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.iii-p95.1
5643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.xl-p18.1
5644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.xliv-p10.1
5645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.xliv-p16.1
5646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.xlvii-p20.1
5647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.lxix-p28.1
5648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.lxxvii-p20.1
5649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.lxxviii-p56.1
5650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.lxxxviii-p33.1
5651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vi.vi.xxvi-p81.1
5652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.iv-p40.1
5653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.iii-p96.1
5654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.xliii-p37.1
5655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.xliv-p18.1
5656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.xlix-p18.1
5657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.lv-p6.1
5658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#vii.xlvii-p21.1
5659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vii.xxvii-p24.1
5660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vii.xl-p28.1
5661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.iv-p49.1
5662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.xix-p10.1
5663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vii.lxxxiii-p17.1
5664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vii.lxxxiii-p18.1
5665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=15#v.ii.vi-p7.2
5666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=20#vii.lxxxix-p52.1
5667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.iii-p170.1
5668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.vi-p19.1
5669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.xlii-p38.1
5670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.li-p48.1
5671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.lii-p6.1
5672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.liii-p43.1
5673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.lxxxix-p23.1
5674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii.lxxvii-p5.1
5675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.lxxiv-p39.1
5676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii.vi-p21.1
5677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vii.xliii-p32.1
5678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vii.xciv-p51.1
5679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.lvii-p23.1
5680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.xciv-p50.1
5681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.xlviii-p32.1
5682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=19#vii.iii-p115.1
5683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#v.ii.v-p20.1
5684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vii.xcvi-p17.1
5685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#vi.v.xlviii-p8.1
5686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=7#v.ii.ii-p20.1
5687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=4&scrV=17#v.iii.i-p12.1
5688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii.xxiii-p94.1
5689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii.lxi-p12.1
5690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=24#v.ii.v-p9.1
5691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vii.xiv-p21.1
5692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#v.iii.xxv-p3.1
5693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#vii.iii-p30.1
5694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=6#vii.iii-p29.1
5695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=16#vii.lxxxviii-p17.1
5696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii.lxviii-p9.1
5697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii.v-p61.1
5698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#vii.xcvi-p18.1
5699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=4#vi.vii.xi-p53.1
5700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.ii.xii-p15.1
5701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#v.iii.xiii-p14.1
5702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=9#vii.xvi-p12.1
5703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=11#v.ii.xv-p5.1
5704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.xxxv-p19.1
5705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.lxvi-p12.1
5706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=14#v.ii.xxiii-p14.2
5707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=15#v.ii.ii-p20.2
5708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=9#v.iii.xvii-p20.1
5709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vi.v.xxxi-p31.1
5710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii.lvi-p17.1
5711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.iii-p101.1
5712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#vii.xlv-p26.1
5713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vii.xlv-p32.1
5714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.lxxix-p24.1
5715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=8#v.iii.xvii-p20.1
5716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=14#vii.xvi-p17.1
5717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=5#v.iii.xii-p17.1
5718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.xlii-p33.1
5719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=7#vii.li-p26.1
5720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii.viii-p13.1
5721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=1#vii.iii-p63.1
5722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#vi.iv.iii-p13.1
5723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#vi.iv.xxxv-p7.1
5724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#vii.lxiv-p9.1
5725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.xvii-p13.1
5726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=17#vii.xxiii-p106.1
5727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii.xxxiv-p25.1
5728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii.xxxv-p39.1
5729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=24#v.iii.xviii-p11.1
5730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=6#vii.xxxvii-p25.1
5731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vii.xxxvii-p26.1
5732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vii.xiii-p29.1
5733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=7#vii.x-p25.1
5734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#vii.xxxvii-p27.1
5735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=8#vii.xiii-p31.1
5736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.xxxvii-p28.1
5737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.xxxvii-p29.1
5738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.iii-p169.1
5739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#vii.xxiv-p22.1
5740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=16#vii.xvii-p10.1
5741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vii.xxxvii-p13.1
5742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=17#vii.xiii-p33.1
5743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=18#vii.xxxvii-p17.1
5744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=18#vii.xiii-p37.1
5745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii.xiii-p38.1
5746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=8#vii.xliv-p9.1
5747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii.xxiii-p18.1
5748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.lxxxix-p54.1
5749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=24#v.iii.viii-p7.1
5750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=24#vii.xl-p77.1
5751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=24#v.iii.xxv-p19.1
5752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=25#vii.xxiii-p26.1
5753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.xlviii-p9.1
5754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p165.1
5755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=12#vii.xxii-p6.1
5756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=2#vii.xxx-p29.1
5757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.ii.xxi-p15.1
5758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=14#v.ii.xxii-p10.1
5759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.xlvi-p7.1
5760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii.lxxviii-p12.1
5761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=13#v.iii.vii-p10.1
5762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.x-p23.1
5763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=7&scrV=27#vii.lxxxvii-p30.1
5764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=0#vii.lxxviii-p12.1
5765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=33#vi.vi.xvii-p7.1
5766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=37#vi.vi.xvii-p8.1
5767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#vi.v.v-p3.1
5768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=7#vii.vii-p21.1
5769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=8#vii.vii-p20.1
5770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=9#vii.vii-p21.1
5771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=14#vii.v-p73.1
5772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=2#vii.lv-p26.1
5773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=4#vii.xxxiv-p36.1
5774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=17#vii.xxxiv-p50.1
5775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.lxxvi-p8.1
5776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vi.v.xxxi-p16.1
5777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii.ix-p28.1
5778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii.x-p52.1
5779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#vii.xxiii-p53.1
5780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=14#vii.ix-p30.1
5781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=18#vi.v.iv-p15.1
5782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=22#vii.xxiii-p107.1
5783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=13#vii.xii-p45.1
5784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii.v-p45.1
5785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii.xxiii-p58.1
5786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii.xlii-p45.1
5787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii.xlvii-p30.1
5788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=8#vii.vii-p7.1
5789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=4#vii.xciv-p10.1
5790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.ii.xi-p19.1
5791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vii.xxxiii-p17.1
5792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vii.lxxxiii-p19.1
5793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vii.xcvi-p7.1
5794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=14#vii.lxxvi-p6.1
5795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vii.xxxiv-p41.1
5796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vii.lxxi-p14.1
5797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=24#vii.lxxvi-p8.1
5798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.liii-p32.1
5799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#vii.lxvi-p11.1
5800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=22#vii.xcv-p6.1
5801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=19#v.iii.xxiii-p4.1
5802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vii.lxii-p14.1
5803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=20#vii.lviii-p7.1
5804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=6#v.iii.xxiii-p4.1
5805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=8#vii.xxiii-p76.1
5806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=17#vi.v.v-p7.1
5807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.xxv-p11.1
5808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii.lxxviii-p7.1
5809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.viii-p41.1
5810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.xlii-p17.1
5811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.xlii-p37.1
5812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.lxvi-p15.1
5813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#vii.lxxxvii-p37.1
5814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.xlii-p18.1
5815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.lxvi-p16.1
5816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.lxxxvii-p39.1
5817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.xxxiv-p9.1
5818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vii.xlviii-p3.4
5819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vii.xlviii-p23.1
5820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vii.lxiv-p26.1
5821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#vii.lxiv-p28.1
5822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=18#vii.ix-p14.1
5823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=18#vii.lxxxi-p35.1
5824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#vii.xc-p39.1
5825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#v.ii.ii-p17.1
5826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vi.vi.xxvi-p84.1
5827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.lxix-p35.1
5828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.lxxix-p17.1
5829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#vii.lxxix-p37.1
5830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#vii.xcv-p10.1
5831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vii.xxxiv-p7.1
5832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#vii.x-p49.1
5833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=24#vii.xxiii-p144.1
5834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=14#v.iii.xxi-p5.2
5835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=16#v.ii.xxii-p3.1
5836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii.xcii-p12.1
5837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#vii.xcii-p20.1
5838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Jude&scrCh=1&scrV=19#vii.xxiii-p154.1
5839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=1&scrV=4#vii.xlvii-p10.1
5840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=6#vi.vii.xi-p3.1
5841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.iv.vi-p3.1
5842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=4&scrV=7#vi.iv.vi-p5.1
5843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vi.iv.vi-p13.1
5844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=5#vii.xxv-p10.1
5845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=6&scrV=10#v.ii.xxii-p19.1
5846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=7&scrV=9#vii.lxiii-p12.1
5847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=12&scrV=9#vii.xxv-p12.1
5848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=15#vii.lxxvii-p16.1
5849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=4#v.ii.ii-p17.1
5850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=2&scrV=14#vii.xl-p63.1
5851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=4&scrV=10#vii.xl-p65.1
5852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=0#vii.v-p33.1
5853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.ii.ii-p16.1
5854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=1#v.iii.xiv-p13.1
5855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.v-p30.1
5856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=5#vii.xxiii-p162.1
5857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=9#vii.lxxvii-p48.1
5858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.xvii-p14.1
5859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.xxxiii-p27.1
5860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=11#vii.lix-p39.1
5861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=3&scrV=6#vii.xiv-p48.1
5862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=4&scrV=20#vii.xii-p43.1
5863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=5&scrV=6#v.ii.xxiii-p10.1
5864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=5&scrV=6#vii.x-p41.1
5865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.x-p41.1
5866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=7&scrV=26#v.ii.xxiii-p8.1
5867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=7&scrV=26#vii.lxix-p23.1
5868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=7&scrV=26#vii.lxx-p12.1
5869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vii.iii-p86.1
5870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=8&scrV=1#vii.iv-p24.1
5871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=13#vi.vii.xi-p57.1
5872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=15#vii.iv-p17.1
5873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=15#vii.lxxxiii-p36.1
5874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=13&scrV=9#vii.xx-p9.1
5875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sus&scrCh=1&scrV=19#v.iii.ix-p13.1
5876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=2Macc&scrCh=7&scrV=22#vii.lii-p15.1
5877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=2&scrV=10#vii.xxviii-p37.1
5878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=2&scrV=12#vii.lxxxv-p25.1
5879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=3&scrV=18#vi.vii.xi-p66.1
5880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=3&scrV=30#vii.xii-p40.1
5881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=5&scrV=4#vii.xxv-p15.1
5882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=5&scrV=5#v.iii.xiv-p7.1
5883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=5&scrV=7#vii.xxxix-p34.1
5884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=6&scrV=37#vii.lxxviii-p22.1
5885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=9&scrV=13#vii.xciv-p7.1
5886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=10&scrV=9#vii.xlix-p11.1
5887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=10&scrV=12#v.ii.xi-p20.1
5888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.ii.i-p19.1
5889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=10&scrV=13#v.ii.xi-p20.1
5890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=10&scrV=13#vii.lxxv-p5.1
5891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=14&scrV=18#vii.iii-p113.1
5892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=17&scrV=28#vii.xix-p9.1
5893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=19&scrV=4#vi.v.lxxiv-p5.1
5894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=21&scrV=1#vii.xii-p53.1
5895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=22&scrV=12#vii.xvii-p16.1
5896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=24&scrV=3#vi.vii.xi-p58.1
5897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=27&scrV=5#v.iii.ix-p11.1
5898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=29&scrV=12#vii.viii-p45.1
5899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=29&scrV=12#vii.xii-p41.1
5900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=29&scrV=27#vii.lvii-p8.1
5901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=30&scrV=23#vii.xxxix-p36.1
5902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=30&scrV=23#vii.lviii-p14.1
5903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=34&scrV=9#v.iii.ix-p5.1
5904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=34&scrV=11#v.iii.ix-p5.1
5905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=13#vii.iv-p0.1
5906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=0#v.ii-p0.1
5907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=3#vii.v-p0.1
5908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#vii.v-p0.1
5909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#vii.vi-p0.1
5910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=22#vii.vii-p0.1
5911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=0#v.iii-p0.1
5912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii.ix-p0.2
5913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii.x-p0.1
5914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=5#vii.xi-p0.1
5915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.viii-p0.1
5916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.ix-p0.1
5917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.xxii-p0.1
5918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=19#vii.xii-p0.1
5919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#vii.xiii-p0.1
5920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=8#vii.xiv-p0.1
5921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=23#vii.xv-p0.1
5922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.xvi-p0.1
5923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#vii.xvii-p0.1
5924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=2#vii.xviii-p0.1
5925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii.xix-p0.1
5926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=25#vii.xx-p0.1
5927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=19#vii.xxv-p0.1
5928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=32#vii.xxiii-p0.1
5929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=33#vii.xxiv-p0.1
5930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=52#vii.xxvi-p0.1
5931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=24#vii.xxvii-p0.1
5932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=25#vii.xxviii-p0.1
5933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=21#vii.xxix-p0.1
5934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=0#vii.xxxi-p0.1
5935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=1#vii.xxx-p0.1
5936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=19#vii.xxxii-p0.1
5937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=21#vii.xxxv-p0.1
5938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=7#vii.xxxiii-p0.1
5939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=15#vii.xxxiv-p0.1
5940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#vii.xxxvi-p0.1
5941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#vii.xxxvii-p0.1
5942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#vii.xxxviii-p0.1
5943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=28#vii.xxi-p0.1
5944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=1#vii.xxxix-p0.1
5945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=30#vii.xl-p0.1
5946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=19#vii.xli-p0.1
5947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=2#vii.xlii-p0.1
5948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=42#vii.xliii-p0.1
5949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=42#vii.xliv-p0.1
5950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=1#vii.xlv-p0.1
5951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=25#vii.xlvi-p0.1
5952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=5#vii.xlvii-p0.1
5953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=32#vii.xlix-p0.1
5954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=8&scrV=34#vii.xlviii-p0.1
5955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=2#vii.l-p0.1
5956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=37#vii.li-p0.1
5957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=57#vii.lii-p0.1
5958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=2#vii.liii-p0.1
5959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=16#vii.liv-p0.1
5960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=38#vii.lv-p0.1
5961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=38#vii.lvi-p0.1
5962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=5#vii.lvii-p0.1
5963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=39#vii.lviii-p0.1
5964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=15#vii.lix-p0.1
5965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=35#vii.lx-p0.1
5966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=56#vii.lxi-p0.1
5967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=58#vii.lxi-p0.1
5968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=6#vii.lxii-p0.1
5969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=21#vii.lxiii-p0.1
5970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=23#vii.lxiii-p0.1
5971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=16#vii.lxiv-p0.1
5972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=9#vii.lxv-p0.1
5973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=3#vii.lxvi-p0.1
5974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=1#vii.lxvii-p0.1
5975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=28#vii.xli-p0.1
5976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=36#vii.lxviii-p0.1
5977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxix-p0.1
5978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxx-p0.1
5979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxi-p0.1
5980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#vii.lxxii-p0.1
5981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#vii.lxxiii-p0.1
5982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=48#vii.lxxiv-p0.1
5983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#vii.lxxv-p0.1
5984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vii.lxxvi-p0.1
5985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=2#vii.lxxvii-p0.1
5986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#vii.lxxviii-p0.1
5987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=25#vii.lxxix-p0.1
5988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=31#vii.lxxx-p0.1
5989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=39#vii.lxxxi-p0.1
5990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=9#vii.lxxxii-p0.1
5991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=53#vii.lxxxiii-p0.1
5992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=55#vii.lxxxiv-p0.1
5993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=6#vii.lxxxv-p0.1
5994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=31#vii.lxxxvi-p0.1
5995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=4#vii.lxxxvii-p0.1
5996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=31#vii.lxxxvii-p0.1
5997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=31#vii.lxxxviii-p0.1
5998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=0#vii.lxxxix-p0.1
5999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=14#vii.xc-p0.1
6000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#vii.xci-p0.1
6001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=44#vii.xcii-p0.1
6002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.xciii-p0.1
6003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#vii.xciv-p0.1
6004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=7#vii.xcv-p0.1
6005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=8#vii.xcvi-p0.1
6006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=24#vii.xcvii-p0.1
6007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#vii.xcix-p0.1
6008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=16#vii.xcviii-p0.1
6009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#vii.lxxix-p0.1
6010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-p26.1
6011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ix-p32.1
6012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-p6.3
6013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-p46.2
6014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.vii-p11.1
6015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xv-p11.1
6016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxiv-p9.1
6017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-p10.1
6018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxviii-p8.3
6019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxviii-p8.2
6020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iii-p10.1
6021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p20.3
6022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p20.4
6023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-p49.1
6024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-p6.1
6025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-p10.1
6026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.viii-p7.1
6027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-p29.1
6028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ii-p8.1
6029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-p24.1
6030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.i-p11.1
6031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vi-p11.1
6032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-p33.2
6033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xiii-p2.1
6034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-p17.1
6035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-p73.1
6036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-p6.2
6037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xii-p3.1
6038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xii-p4.1
6039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-p35.4
6040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.ii-p18.2
6041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vii-p45.2
6042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxiii-p14.1
6043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xliv-p5.2
6044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-p32.1
6045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xliv-p5.1
6046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-p35.1
6047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.viii-p4.1
6048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p19.2
6049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-p24.1
6050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxv-p9.1
6051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxviii-p7.2
6052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-p40.1
6053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p11.1
6054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-p7.1
6055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-p16.1
6056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvii-p8.2
6057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-p45.1
6058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-p14.1
6059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-p14.2
6060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-p73.2
6061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iii-p10.2
6062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p18.3
6063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-p12.1
6064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.x-p8.2
6065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-p24.2
6066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p20.2
6067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxviii-p8.1
6068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-p46.3
6069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-p6.1
6070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-p10.1
6071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxi-p17.1
6072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p20.1
6073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xvii-p4.1
6074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxviii-p6.1
6075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-p33.1
6076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p19.1
6077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-p48.1
6078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-p10.2
6079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-p4.1
6080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-p4.4
6081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-p27.2
6082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-p4.3
6083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xii-p3.1
6084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xii-p3.2
6085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-p35.1
6086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-p49.2
6087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-p44.1
6088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-p7.1
6089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-p7.2
6090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-p10.2
6091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.xi-p31.1
6092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxi-p6.1
6093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-p4.2
6094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvii-p3.1
6095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-p25.1
6096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-p8.1
6097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-p47.1
6098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-p17.2
6099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-p81.1
6100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.v-p9.5
6101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.v-p9.2
6102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-p8.1
6103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.v-p9.4
6104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.i-p6.1
6105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p6.1
6106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-p13.1
6107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p31.1
6108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iii-p7.1
6109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-p30.1
6110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#i-Page_i
6111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#ii-Page_iii
6112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#ii-Page_iv
6113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iii-Page_v
6114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_vii
6115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_viii
6116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_ix
6117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_x
6118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_xi
6119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#iv-Page_xii
6120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.i-Page_xiii
6121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii-Page_3
6122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.i-Page_4
6123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ii-Page_5
6124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.iii-Page_6
6125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.iv-Page_7
6126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.v-Page_8
6127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vi-Page_9
6128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.vii-Page_10
6129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_11
6130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.ix-Page_12
6131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.x-Page_13
6132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_14
6133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xi-Page_15
6134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xii-Page_16
6135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xiii-Page_17
6136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xv-Page_18
6137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-Page_19
6138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-Page_20
6139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-Page_21
6140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvi-Page_22
6141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xvii-Page_23
6142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xviii-Page_24
6143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_25
6144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_26
6145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xix-Page_27
6146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_28
6147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xx-Page_29
6148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxi-Page_30
6149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxii-Page_31
6150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxii-Page_32
6151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.ii.xxiii-Page_33
6152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii-Page_34
6153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.i-Page_35
6154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ii-Page_36
6155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ii-Page_37
6156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iii-Page_38
6157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.iv-Page_39
6158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.v-Page_40
6159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.vi-Page_41
6160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.vii-Page_42
6161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.viii-Page_43
6162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ix-Page_44
6163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.ix-Page_45
6164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.x-Page_46
6165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xi-Page_47
6166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xii-Page_48
6167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xiii-Page_49
6168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xv-Page_50
6169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xvi-Page_51
6170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xvi-Page_52
6171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xvii-Page_53
6172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xviii-Page_54
6173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xviii-Page_55
6174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xix-Page_56
6175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xx-Page_57
6176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xx-Page_58
6177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxii-Page_59
6178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxiii-Page_60
6179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxiv-Page_61
6180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxv-Page_62
6181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#v.iii.xxv-Page_63
6182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.i-Page_65
6183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.ii-Page_67
6184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.ii-Page_68
6185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.ii-Page_69
6186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.ii-Page_70
6187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iii-Page_71
6188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iii-Page_72
6189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv-Page_77
6190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.i-Page_78
6191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.ii-Page_79
6192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.iv-Page_80
6193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.vi-Page_81
6194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.vii-Page_82
6195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.viii-Page_83
6196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.x-Page_84
6197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xii-Page_85
6198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xiv-Page_86
6199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xvii-Page_87
6200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xix-Page_88
6201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxi-Page_89
6202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_90
6203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_91
6204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxiii-Page_92
6205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxv-Page_93
6206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxvi-Page_94
6207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxviii-Page_95
6208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxix-Page_96
6209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxi-Page_97
6210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxi-Page_98
6211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxii-Page_99
6212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxiv-Page_100
6213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.iv.xxxv-Page_101
6214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v-Page_102
6215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.ii-Page_103
6216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.iv-Page_104
6217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.iv-Page_105
6218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.v-Page_106
6219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.v-Page_107
6220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_108
6221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_109
6222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_110
6223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_111
6224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vi-Page_112
6225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.vii-Page_113
6226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.viii-Page_114
6227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xi-Page_115
6228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xii-Page_116
6229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xiii-Page_117
6230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xiii-Page_118
6231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xiii-Page_119
6232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xv-Page_120
6233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_121
6234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_122
6235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xviii-Page_123
6236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xix-Page_124
6237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xx-Page_125
6238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xx-Page_126
6239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxi-Page_127
6240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxii-Page_128
6241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxiv-Page_129
6242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxv-Page_130
6243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxvi-Page_131
6244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxviii-Page_132
6245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxviii-Page_133
6246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxix-Page_134
6247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxix-Page_135
6248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxix-Page_136
6249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxi-Page_137
6250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxi-Page_138
6251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxi-Page_139
6252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxiii-Page_140
6253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxvi-Page_141
6254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xxxix-Page_142
6255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xl-Page_143
6256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlii-Page_144
6257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xliii-Page_145
6258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xliv-Page_146
6259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlv-Page_147
6260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlvi-Page_148
6261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlvii-Page_149
6262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlviii-Page_150
6263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.xlviii-Page_151
6264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.l-Page_152
6265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.li-Page_153
6266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.liv-Page_154
6267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxi-Page_155
6268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxiii-Page_156
6269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxiv-Page_157
6270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxvi-Page_158
6271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxvii-Page_159
6272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxix-Page_160
6273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxix-Page_161
6274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxi-Page_162
6275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxi-Page_163
6276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxi-Page_164
6277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxiii-Page_165
6278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxiv-Page_166
6279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxvi-Page_167
6280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxvi-Page_168
6281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxviii-Page_169
6282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxviii-Page_170
6283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxix-Page_171
6284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxix-Page_172
6285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxx-Page_173
6286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxxi-Page_174
6287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.v.lxxxi-Page_175
6288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi-Page_176
6289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ii-Page_177
6290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.iii-Page_178
6291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.iii-Page_179
6292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.iii-Page_180
6293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.iv-Page_181
6294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.v-Page_182
6295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.v-Page_183
6296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vi-Page_184
6297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vi-Page_185
6298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vii-Page_186
6299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vii-Page_187
6300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vii-Page_188
6301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.vii-Page_189
6302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.viii-Page_190
6303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.viii-Page_191
6304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.viii-Page_192
6305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ix-Page_193
6306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ix-Page_194
6307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.ix-Page_195
6308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.x-Page_196
6309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xii-Page_197
6310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_198
6311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_199
6312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_200
6313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_201
6314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xiv-Page_202
6315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xvi-Page_203
6316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xvii-Page_204
6317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xix-Page_205
6318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxi-Page_206
6319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxii-Page_207
6320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxiv-Page_208
6321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxv-Page_209
6322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxv-Page_210
6323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxv-Page_211
6324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxv-Page_212
6325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxv-Page_213
6326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_214
6327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_215
6328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_216
6329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_217
6330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_218
6331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_219
6332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_220
6333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_221
6334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_222
6335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_223
6336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vi.xxvi-Page_224
6337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii-Page_225
6338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.iii-Page_226
6339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.v-Page_227
6340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.vii-Page_228
6341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.viii-Page_229
6342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.ix-Page_230
6343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.xi-Page_231
6344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.xi-Page_232
6345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.xi-Page_233
6346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.xi-Page_234
6347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vi.vii.xi-Page_235
6348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.i-Page_236
6349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ii-Page_239
6350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ii-Page_240
6351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_245
6352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_246
6353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_247
6354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_248
6355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_249
6356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_250
6357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_251
6358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_252
6359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_253
6360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_254
6361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_255
6362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_256
6363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_257
6364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_258
6365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iii-Page_259
6366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_260
6367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_261
6368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_262
6369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_263
6370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_264
6371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_265
6372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.iv-Page_266
6373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_267
6374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_268
6375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_269
6376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_270
6377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.v-Page_271
6378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vi-Page_272
6379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_273
6380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.vii-Page_274
6381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_275
6382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_276
6383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_277
6384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_278
6385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_279
6386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.viii-Page_280
6387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_281
6388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_282
6389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_283
6390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.ix-Page_284
6391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_285
6392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_286
6393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_287
6394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.x-Page_288
6395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xi-Page_289
6396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_290
6397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_291
6398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_292
6399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_293
6400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xii-Page_294
6401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_295
6402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_296
6403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_297
6404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiii-Page_298
6405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_299
6406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_300
6407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_301
6408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_302
6409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_303
6410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xiv-Page_304
6411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xv-Page_305
6412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvi-Page_306
6413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_307
6414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xvii-Page_308
6415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xviii-Page_309
6416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xviii-Page_310
6417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_311
6418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_312
6419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xix-Page_313
6420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_314
6421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xx-Page_315
6422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxi-Page_316
6423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxii-Page_317
6424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxii-Page_318
6425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_319
6426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_320
6427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_321
6428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_322
6429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_323
6430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_324
6431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_325
6432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_326
6433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_327
6434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_328
6435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_329
6436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_330
6437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_331
6438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiii-Page_332
6439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_333
6440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxiv-Page_334
6441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxv-Page_335
6442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_336
6443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvi-Page_337
6444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_338
6445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxvii-Page_339
6446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_340
6447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_341
6448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxviii-Page_342
6449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_343
6450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_344
6451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_345
6452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_346
6453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxix-Page_347
6454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxx-Page_348
6455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxi-Page_349
6456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_350
6457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_351
6458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxii-Page_352
6459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_353
6460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_354
6461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_355
6462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_356
6463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiii-Page_357
6464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_358
6465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_359
6466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_360
6467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_361
6468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxiv-Page_362
6469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_363
6470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_364
6471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxv-Page_365
6472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvi-Page_366
6473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_367
6474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxvii-Page_368
6475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_369
6476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_370
6477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_371
6478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_372
6479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxviii-Page_373
6480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_374
6481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_375
6482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_376
6483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_377
6484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xxxix-Page_378
6485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_379
6486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_380
6487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_381
6488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_382
6489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_383
6490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_384
6491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_385
6492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_386
6493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_387
6494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xl-Page_388
6495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_389
6496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_390
6497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_391
6498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xli-Page_392
6499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_393
6500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_394
6501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_395
6502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_396
6503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlii-Page_397
6504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_398
6505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_399
6506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliii-Page_400
6507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xliv-Page_401
6508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_402
6509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_403
6510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_404
6511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlv-Page_405
6512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvi-Page_406
6513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_407
6514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlvii-Page_408
6515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_409
6516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_410
6517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlviii-Page_411
6518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_412
6519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xlix-Page_413
6520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_414
6521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.l-Page_415
6522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_416
6523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_417
6524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_418
6525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_419
6526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.li-Page_420
6527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_421
6528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lii-Page_422
6529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_423
6530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_424
6531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liii-Page_425
6532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liv-Page_426
6533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.liv-Page_427
6534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-Page_428
6535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lv-Page_429
6536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvi-Page_430
6537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_431
6538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_432
6539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_433
6540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_434
6541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lvii-Page_435
6542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lviii-Page_436
6543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_437
6544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_438
6545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_439
6546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lix-Page_440
6547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_441
6548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lx-Page_442
6549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxi-Page_443
6550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_444
6551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxii-Page_445
6552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiii-Page_446
6553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_447
6554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_448
6555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxiv-Page_449
6556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_450
6557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_451
6558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxv-Page_452
6559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_453
6560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvi-Page_454
6561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvii-Page_455
6562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxvii-Page_456
6563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_457
6564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxviii-Page_458
6565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_459
6566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_460
6567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_461
6568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_462
6569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_463
6570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_464
6571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxix-Page_465
6572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxx-Page_466
6573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxi-Page_467
6574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxii-Page_468
6575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxii-Page_469
6576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiii-Page_470
6577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_471
6578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxiv-Page_472
6579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_473
6580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxv-Page_474
6581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvi-Page_475
6582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_476
6583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_477
6584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_478
6585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_479
6586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_480
6587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxvii-Page_481
6588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_482
6589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_483
6590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_484
6591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_485
6592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxviii-Page_486
6593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_487
6594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_488
6595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_489
6596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_490
6597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxix-Page_491
6598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_492
6599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_493
6600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_494
6601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxx-Page_495
6602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_496
6603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_497
6604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxi-Page_498
6605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_499
6606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_500
6607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxii-Page_501
6608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_502
6609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_503
6610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiii-Page_504
6611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_505
6612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxiv-Page_506
6613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_507
6614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_508
6615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxv-Page_509
6616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvi-Page_510
6617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvi-Page_511
6618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_512
6619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_513
6620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxvii-Page_514
6621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_515
6622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_516
6623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxviii-Page_517
6624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_518
6625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_519
6626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_520
6627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_521
6628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_522
6629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.lxxxix-Page_523
6630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_524
6631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_525
6632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_526
6633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xc-Page_527
6634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xci-Page_528
6635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xci-Page_529
6636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_530
6637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcii-Page_531
6638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciii-Page_532
6639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_533
6640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_534
6641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_535
6642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xciv-Page_536
6643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcv-Page_537
6644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcv-Page_538
6645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_539
6646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvi-Page_540
6647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_541
6648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_542
6649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcvii-Page_543
6650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcviii-Page_544
6651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf106/cache/npnf106.html3#vii.xcix-Page_545
