# source: Fathers/English/NPNF1/Volume VII.   Homilies on the Gospel of John, Homilies on the First Epistle of John, Soliloquies
# series: NPNF1
# volume: Volume VII.
# father: augustine
# work: Soliloquies
# latin_match_candidate: (none)
# extracted: 2026-09-01
# note: Public-domain Schaff English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
soliloquies.

   translated by

   rev. charles c. starbuck, a.m.,

   andover, mass.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Preface to Soliloquies.

   The two books of the Soliloquia were, by the statement of the author
   himself (Lib. I. 17), written in his thirty-third year. They were
   therefore written immediately after his baptism, evidently in the rural
   retreat of Cassiacum, in Upper Italy, belonging to his friend
   Verecundus, to which we know that he retreated for awhile after he had
   been received into the Church. It is therefore his earliest Christian
   work. And as it is early, so it is raw. His new-found faith struggles
   to justify itself through an intricate course of reasoning, in which he
   confuses helplessly the forms of logic with the substance of truth.
   However, though crude, his essential characteristics appear distinctly
   in it; his power of reasoning, his wide observation of fundamental
   facts, and of mental processes and experiences, his love of his
   friends, and above all of Alypius, his ardent aspirations after
   supernal light, his deep devotion, which, however, has not availed to
   subdue the artificialities of rhetoric into childlike simplicity.

   He expresses in the work a longing for continued support to his tender
   faith from Ambrose, who, however, is described as having temporarily
   withdrawn into some Trans-alpine seclusion, where Augustin complains
   that he hardly knows how to reach him even by a letter.

   He appears in the work as yet undetermined as to the form and course of
   his future life. The vast services he was to render the Church do not
   appear even to glimmer on his mind. Indeed, the life of leisure,
   devoted only, with some chosen friends, to the abstract contemplation
   of God, which forms his ideal, shows how very faintly penetrated he yet
   was by the Christian idea of serviceableness, as, in fact, there is in
   the Soliloquia very little that is distinctively Christian, either in
   doctrine or experience. But all the greatness of his following life
   lies shut up in his pliancy to the will of God, here expressed, and in
   his conviction that the God whom Christ reveals is the one true God.

   In his Retractationes he recalls a few sentences of this work, one,
   which he seems to regard as inadvertently so expressed as to be capable
   of a Sabellian turn; another, which he regards as savoring too much of
   a Gnostic or Neo-Platonic abhorrence of matter; and another, in which
   he treats the effects of mental discipline as Plato does, supposing it
   to bring out into distinctness knowledge already possessed and
   forgotten. In the Retractationes he gives the true explanation, namely,
   that the mind is so constituted, that by the light of the Eternal
   Reason present in it, it is capable according to its measure of
   apprehending truths of which it had never before laid hold.

   I have endeavored, in the rendering, to avail myself, wherever
   requisite, of the elder idioms of our tongue, which appear more
   germane, both to the matter and manner of St. Augustin, than the
   unmellowed English of the nineteenth century.
     __________________________________________________________________

   two books of soliloquies.

   ------------------------

   Book I.

   As I had been long revolving with myself matters many and various, and
   had been for many days sedulously inquiring both concerning myself and
   my chief good, or what of evil there was to be avoided by me: suddenly
   some one addresses me, whether I myself, or some other one, within me
   or without, I know not. For this very thing is what I chiefly toil to
   know. There says then to me, let us call it Reason,--Behold, assuming
   that you had discovered somewhat, to whose charge would you commit it,
   that you might go on with other things? A. To the memory, no doubt. R.
   But is the force of memory so great as to keep safely everything that
   may have been wrought out in thought? A. It hardly could, nay indeed it
   certainly could not. R. Therefore you must write. But what are you to
   do, seeing that your health recoils from the labor of writing? nor will
   these things bear to be dictated, seeing they consent not but with
   utter solitude. A. True. Therefore I am wholly at a loss what to say.
   R. Entreat of God health and help, that you may the better compass your
   desires, and commit to writing this very petition, that you may be the
   more courageous in the offspring of your brain. Then, what you discover
   sum up in a few brief conclusions. Nor care just now to invite a crowd
   of readers; it will suffice if these things find audience among the few
   of thine own city.

   2. O God, Framer of the universe, grant me first rightly to invoke
   Thee; then to show myself worthy to be heard by Thee; lastly, deign to
   set me free. God, through whom all things, which of themselves were
   not, tend to be. God, who withholdest from perishing even that which
   seems to be mutually destructive. God, who, out of nothing, hast
   created this world, which the eyes of all perceive to be most
   beautiful. God, who dost not cause evil, but causest that it be not
   most evil. God, who to the few that flee for refuge to that which truly
   is, showest evil to be nothing. God, through whom the universe, even
   taking in its sinister side, is perfect. God, from whom things most
   widely at variance with Thee effect no dissonance, since worser things
   are included in one plan with better. God, who art loved, wittingly or
   unwittingly, by everything that is capable of loving. God, in whom are
   all things, to whom nevertheless neither the vileness of any creature
   is vile, nor its wickedness harmful, nor its error erroneous. God, who
   hast not willed that any but the pure should know the truth. God, the
   Father of truth, the Father of wisdom, the Father of the true and
   crowning life, the Father of blessedness, the Father of that which is
   good and fair, the Father of intelligible light, the Father of our
   awakening and illumination, the Father of the pledge by which we are
   admonished to return to Thee.

   3. Thee I invoke, O God, the Truth, in whom and from whom and through
   whom all things are true which anywhere are true. God, the Wisdom, in
   whom and from whom and through whom all things are wise which anywhere
   are wise. God, the true and crowning Life, in whom and from whom and
   through whom all things live, which truly and supremely live. God, the
   Blessedness, in whom and from whom and through whom all things are
   blessed, which anywhere are blessed. God, the Good and Fair, in whom
   and from whom and through whom all things are good and fair, which
   anywhere are good and fair. God, the intelligible Light, in whom and
   from whom and through whom all things intelligibly shine, which
   anywhere intelligibly shine. God, whose kingdom is that whole world of
   which sense has no ken. God, from whose kingdom a law is even derived
   down upon these lower realms. God, from whom to be turned away, is to
   fall: to whom to be turned back, is to rise again: in whom to abide, is
   to stand firm. God, from whom to go forth, is to die: to whom to
   return, is to revive: in whom to have our dwelling, is to live. God,
   whom no one loses, unless deceived: whom no one seeks, unless stirred
   up: whom no one finds, unless made pure. God, whom to forsake, is one
   thing with perishing; towards whom to tend, is one thing with living:
   whom to see is one thing with having. God, towards whom faith rouses
   us, hope lifts us up, with whom love joins us. God, through whom we
   overcome the enemy, Thee I entreat. God, through whose gift it is, that
   we do not perish utterly. God, by whom we are warned to watch. God, by
   whom we distinguish good from ill. God, by whom we flee evil, and
   follow good. God, through whom we yield not to calamities. God, through
   whom we faithfully serve and benignantly govern. God, through whom we
   learn those things to be another's which aforetime we accounted ours,
   and those things to be ours which we used to account as belonging to
   another. God, through whom the baits and enticements of evil things
   have no power to hold us. God, through whom it is that diminished
   possessions leave ourselves complete. God, through whom our better good
   is not subject to a worse. God, through whom death is swallowed up in
   victory. God, who dost turn us to Thyself. God, who dost strip us of
   that which is not, and arrayest us in that which is. God, who dost make
   us worthy to be heard. God, who dost fortify us. God, who leadest us
   into all truth. God, who speakest to us only good, who neither
   terrifiest into madness nor sufferest another so to do. God, who
   callest us back into the way. God, who leadest us to the door of life.
   God, who causest it to be opened to them that knock. God, who givest us
   the bread of life. God, through whom we thirst for the draught, which
   being drunk we never thirst. God, who dost convince the world of sin,
   of righteousness, and of judgment. God, through whom it is that we are
   not commoved by those who refuse to believe. God, through whom we
   disapprove the error of those, who think that there are no merits of
   souls before Thee. God, through whom it comes that we are not in
   bondage to the weak and beggarly elements. God, who cleansest us, and
   preparest us for Divine rewards, to me propitious come Thou.

   4. Whatever has been said by me, Thou the only God, do Thou come to my
   help, the one true and eternal substance, where is no discord, no
   confusion, no shifting, no indigence, no death. Where is supreme
   concord, supreme evidence, supreme steadfastness, supreme fullness, and
   life supreme. Where nothing is lacking, nothing redundant. Where
   Begetter and Begotten are one. God, whom all things serve, that serve,
   to whom is compliant every virtuous soul. By whose laws the poles
   revolve, the stars fulfill their courses, the sun vivifies the day, the
   moon tempers the night: and all the framework of things, day after day
   by vicissitude of light and gloom, month after month by waxings and
   wanings of the moon, year after year by orderly successions of spring
   and summer and fall and winter, cycle after cycle by accomplished
   concurrences of the solar course, and through the mighty orbs of time,
   folding and refolding upon themselves, as the stars still recur to
   their first conjunctions, maintains, so far as this merely visible
   matter allows, the mighty constancy of things. God, by whose
   ever-during laws the stable motion of shifting things is suffered to
   feel no perturbation, the thronging course of circling ages is ever
   recalled anew to the image of immovable quiet: by whose laws the choice
   of the soul is free, and to the good rewards and to the evil pains are
   distributed by necessities settled throughout the nature of everything.
   God, from whom distil even to us all benefits, by whom all evils are
   withheld from us. God, above whom is nothing, beyond whom is nothing,
   without whom is nothing. God, under whom is the whole, in whom is the
   whole, with whom is the whole. Who hast made man after Thine image and
   likeness, which he discovers, who has come to know himself. Hear me,
   hear me, graciously hear me, my God, my Lord, my King, my Father, my
   Cause, my Hope, my Wealth, my Honor, my House, my Country, my Health,
   my Light, my Life. Hear, hear, hear me graciously, in that way, all
   Thine own, which though known to few is to those few known so well.

   5. Henceforth Thee alone do I love, Thee alone I follow, Thee alone I
   seek, Thee alone am I prepared to serve, for Thou alone art Lord by a
   just title, of Thy dominion do I desire to be. Direct, I pray, and
   command whatever Thou wilt, but heal and open my ears, that I may hear
   Thine utterances. Heal and open my eyes, that I may behold Thy
   significations of command. Drive delusion from me, that I may recognize
   Thee. Tell me whither I must tend, to behold Thee, and I hope that I
   shall do all things Thou mayest enjoin. O Lord, most merciful Father
   receive, I pray, Thy fugitive; enough already, surely, have I been
   punished, long enough have I served Thine enemies, whom Thou hast under
   Thy feet, long enough have I been a sport of fallacies. Receive me
   fleeing from these, Thy house-born servant, for did not these receive
   me, though another Master's, when I was fleeing from Thee? To Thee I
   feel I must return: I knock; may Thy door be opened to me; teach me the
   way to Thee. Nothing else have I than the will: nothing else do I know
   than that fleeting and falling things are to be spurned, fixed and
   everlasting things to be sought. This I do, Father, because this alone
   I know, but from what quarter to approach Thee I do not know. Do Thou
   instruct me, show me, give me my provision for the way. If it is by
   faith that those find Thee, who take refuge with Thee then grant faith:
   if by virtue, virtue: if by knowledge, knowledge. Augment in me, faith,
   hope, and charity. O goodness of Thine, singular and most to be
   admired!

   7. A. Behold I have prayed to God. R. What then wouldst thou know? A.
   All these things which I have prayed for. R. Sum them up in brief. A.
   God and the soul, that is what I desire to know. R. Nothing more? A.
   Nothing whatever. R. Therefore begin to inquire. But first explain how,
   if God should be set forth to thee, thou wouldst be able to say, It is
   enough. A. I know not how He is to be so set forth to me as that I
   shall say, It is enough: for I believe not that I know anything in such
   wise as I desire to know God. R. What then are we to do? Dost thou not
   judge that first thou oughtest to know, what it is to know God
   sufficiently, so that arriving at that point, thou mayst seek no
   farther? A. So I judge, indeed: but how that is to be brought about, I
   see not. For what have I ever understood like to God, so that I could
   say, As I understand this, so would I fain understand God? R. Not
   having yet made acquaintance with God, whence hast thou come to know
   that thou knowest nothing like to God? A. Because if I knew anything
   like God, I should doubtless love it: but now I love nothing else than
   God and the soul, neither of which I know. R. Do you then not love your
   friends? A. Loving them, how can I otherwise than love the soul? R. Do
   you then love gnats and bugs similarly? A. The animating soul I said I
   loved, not animals. R. Men are then either not your friends, or you do
   not love them. For every man is an animal, and you say that you do not
   love animals. A. Men are my friends, and I love them, not in that they
   are animals, but in that they are men, that is, in that they are
   animated by rational souls, which I love even in highwaymen. For I may
   with good right in any man love reason, even though I rightly hate him,
   who uses ill that which I love. Therefore I love my friends the more,
   the more worthily they use their rational soul, or certainly the more
   earnestly they desire to use it worthily.

   8. R. I allow so much: but yet if any one should say to thee, I will
   give thee to know God as well as thou dost know Alypius, wouldst thou
   not give thanks, and say, It is enough? A. I should give thanks indeed:
   but I should not say, It is enough. R. Why, I pray? A. Because I do not
   even know God so well as I know Alypius, and yet I do not know Alypius
   well enough. R. Beware then lest shamelessly thou wouldest fain be
   satisfied in the knowledge of God, who hast not even such a knowledge
   of Alypius as satisfies. A. Non sequitur. For, comparing it with the
   stars, what is of lower account than my supper? and yet what I shall
   sup on to-morrow I know not: but in what sign the moon will be, I need
   take no shame to profess that I know. R. Is it then enough for thee to
   know God as well as thou dost know in what sign the moon will hold her
   course to-morrow? A. It is not enough, for this I test by the senses.
   But I do not know whether or not either God, or some hidden cause of
   nature may suddenly change the moon's ordinary course, which if it came
   to pass, would render false all that I had presumed. R. And believest
   thou that this may happen? A. I do not believe. But I at least am
   seeking what I may know, not what I may believe. Now everything that we
   know, we may with reason perhaps be said to believe, but not to know
   everything which we believe. R. In this matter therefore you reject all
   testimony of the senses? A. I utterly reject it. R. That friend of
   yours then, whom you say you do not yet know, is it by sense that you
   wish to know him or by intellectual perception? A. Whatever in him I
   know by sense, if indeed anything is known by sense, is both mean and
   sufficiently known. But that part which bears affection to me, that is,
   the mind itself, I desire to know intellectually. R. Can it, indeed, be
   known otherwise? A. By no means. R. Do you venture then to call your
   friend, your inmost friend, unknown to you? A. Why not venture? For I
   account most equitable that law of friendship, by which it is
   prescribed, that as one is to bear no less, so he is to bear no more
   affection to his friend than to himself. Since then I know not myself,
   what injury does he suffer, whom I declare to be unknown to me, above
   all since (as I believe) he does not even know himself? R. If then
   these things which thou wouldst fain know, are of such a sort as are to
   be intellectually attained, when I said it was shameless in thee to
   crave to know God, when thou knowest not even Alypius, thou oughtest
   not to have urged to me the similitude of thy supper and the moon, if
   these things, as thou hast said, appertain to sense.

   9. But let that go, and now answer to this: if those things which Plato
   and Plotinus have said concerning God are true, is it enough for thee
   to know God as they knew him? A. Even allowing that those things which
   they have said are true, does it follow at once that they knew them?
   For many copiously utter what they do not know, as I myself have said
   that I desired to know all those things for which I prayed, which I
   should not desire if I knew them already: yet I was none the less able
   to enumerate them all. For I have enumerated not what I intellectually
   comprehended, but things which I have gathered from all sides and
   entrusted to my memory, and to which I yield as ample a faith as I am
   able: but to know is another thing. R. Tell me, I pray, do you at least
   know in geometry what a line is? A. So much I certainly know. R. Nor in
   professing so do you stand in awe of the Academicians? A. In no wise.
   For they, as wise men, would not run the risk of erring: but I am not
   wise. Therefore as yet I do not shrink from professing the knowledge of
   those things which I have come to know. But if, as I desire, I should
   ever have attained to wisdom, I will do what I may find her to suggest.
   R. I except not thereto: but, I had begun to inquire, as you know a
   line, do you also know a ball, or, as they say, a sphere? A. I do. R.
   Both alike, or one more, one less? A. Just alike. I am altogether
   certain of both. R. Have you grasped these by the senses or the
   intellect? A. Nay, I have essayed the senses in this matter as a ship.
   For after they had carried me to the place I was aiming for, and I had
   dismissed them, and was now, as it were, left on dry ground, where I
   began to turn these things over in thought, the oscillations of the
   senses long continued to swim in my brain. Wherefore it seems to me
   that it would be easier to sail on dry land, than to learn geometry by
   the senses, although young beginners seem to derive some help from
   them. R. Then you do not hesitate to call whatever acquaintance you
   have with such things, Knowledge? A. Not if the Stoics permit, who
   attribute knowledge only to the Wise Man. Certainly I maintain myself
   to have the perception of these things, which they concede even to
   folly: but neither am I at all in any great fear of the stoics:
   unquestionably I hold those things which thou hast questioned me of in
   knowledge: proceed now till I see to what end thou questionest me of
   them. R. Be not too eager, we are not pressed for time. But give strict
   heed, lest you should make some rash concession. I would fain give thee
   the joy of things wherein thou fearest not to slip, and dost thou
   enjoin haste, as in a matter of no moment? A. God grant the event as
   thou forecastest it. Therefore question at thy will, and rebuke me more
   sharply if I err so again.

   10. R. It is then plain to you that a line cannot possibly be
   longitudinally divided into two? A. Plainly so. R. What of a
   cross-section? A. This, of course, is possible to infinity. R. But is
   it equally apparent that if, beginning with the centre, you make any
   sections you please of a sphere, no two resulting circles will be
   equal? A. It is equally apparent. R. What are a line and a sphere? Do
   they seem to you to be identical, or somewhat different? A. Who does
   not see that they differ very much? R. If then you know this and that
   equally well, while yet, as you acknowledge, they differ widely from
   each other, there must be an indifferent knowledge of different things.
   A. Who ever disputed it? R. You, a little while ago. For when I asked
   thee what way of knowing God was in thy desire, such that thou couldst
   say, It is enough, thou didst answer that thou couldst not explain
   this, because thou hadst no perception held in such a way as that in
   which thou didst desire to perceive God, for that thou didst know
   nothing like God. What then? Are a line and sphere alike? A. Absurd. R.
   But I had asked, not what you knew such as God, but what you knew so as
   you desire to know God. For you know a line in such wise as you know a
   sphere, although the properties of a line are not those of a sphere.
   Wherefore answer whether it would suffice you to know God in such wise
   as you know that geometrical ball; that is, to be equally without doubt
   concerning God as concerning that.

   11. A. Pardon me, however vehemently thou urge and argue, yet I dare
   not say that I wish so to know God as I know these things. For not only
   the objects of the knowledge, but the knowledge itself appears to be
   unlike. First, because the line and the ball are not so unlike, but
   that one science includes the knowl edge of them both: but no
   geometrician has ever professed to teach God. Then, if the knowledge of
   God and of these things were equivalent, I should rejoice as much to
   know them as I am persuaded that I should rejoice if God were known by
   me. But now I hold these things in the deepest disdain in comparison
   with Him, so that sometimes it seems to me that if I understood Him,
   and that in that manner in which He can be seen, all these things would
   perish out of my knowledge: since even now by reason of the love of Him
   they scarce come into my mind. R. Allow that thou wouldst rejoice more
   and much more in knowing God than in knowing these things, yet not by a
   different perception of the things; unless we are to say that thou
   beholdest with a different vision the earth and the serenity of the
   skies, although the aspect of this latter soothes and delights thee far
   more than of the former. But unless your eyes are deceived, I believe
   that, if asked whether you are as well assured that you see earth as
   heaven, you ought to answer yes, although you are not as much delighted
   by the earth and her beauty as by the beauty and magnificence of
   heaven. A. I am moved, I confess, by this similitude, and am brought to
   allow that by how much earth differs in her kind from heaven, so much
   do those demonstrations of the sciences, true and certain as they are,
   differ from the intelligible majesty of God.

   12. R. Thou art moved to good effect. For the Reason which is talking
   with thee promises so to demonstrate God to thy mind, as the sun
   demonstrates himself to the eyes. For the senses of the soul are as it
   were the eyes of the mind; but all the certainties of the sciences are
   like those things which are brought to light by the sun, that they may
   be seen, the earth, for instance, and the things upon it: while God is
   Himself the Illuminator. Now I, Reason, am that in the mind, which the
   act of looking is in the eyes. For to have eyes is not the same as to
   look; nor again to look the same as to see. Therefore the soul has need
   of three distinct things: to have eyes, such as it can use to good
   advantage, to look, and to see. Sound eyes, that means the mind pure
   from all stain of the body, that is, now remote and purged from the
   lusts of mortal things: which, in the first condition, nothing else
   accomplishes for her than Faith. For what cannot yet be shown forth to
   her stained and languishing with sins, because, unless sound, she
   cannot see, if she does not believe that otherwise she will not see,
   she gives no heed to her health. But what if she believes that the case
   stands as I say, and that, if she is to see at all, she can only see on
   these terms, but despairs of being healed; does she not utterly contemn
   herself and cast herself away, refusing to comply with the
   prescriptions of the physician? A. Beyond doubt, above all because by
   sickness remedies must needs be felt as severe. R. Then Hope must be
   added to Faith. A. So I believe. R. Moreover, if she both believes that
   the case stands so, and hopes that she could be healed, yet loves not,
   desires not the promised light itself, and thinks that she ought
   meanwhile to be content with her darkness, which now, by use, has
   become pleasant to her; does she not none the less reject the
   physician? A. Beyond doubt. R. Therefore Charity must needs make a
   third. A. Nothing so needful. R. Without these three things therefore
   no mind is healed, so that it can see, that is, understand its God.

   13. When therefore the mind has come to have sound eyes, what next? A.
   That she look. R. The mind's act of looking is Reason; but because it
   does not follow that every one who looks sees, a right and perfect act
   of looking, that is, one followed by vision, is called Virtue; for
   Virtue is either right or perfect Reason. But even the power of vision,
   though the eyes be now healed, has not force to turn them to the light,
   unless these three things abide. Faith, whereby the soul believes that
   thing, to which she is asked to turn her gaze, is of such sort, that
   being seen it will give blessedness; Hope, whereby the mind judges that
   if she looks attentively, she will see; Charity, whereby she desires to
   see and to be filled with the enjoyment of the sight. The attentive
   view is now followed by the very vision of God, which is the end of
   looking; not because the power of beholding ceases, but because it has
   nothing further to which it can turn itself: and this is the truly
   perfect virtue, Virtue arriving at its end, which is followed by the
   life of blessedness. Now this vision itself is that apprehension which
   is in the soul, compounded of the apprehending subject and of that
   which is apprehended: as in like manner seeing with the eyes results
   from the conjunction of the sense and the object of sense, either of
   which being withdrawn, seeing becomes impossible.

   14. Therefore when the soul has obtained to see, that is, to apprehend
   God, let us see whether those three things are still necessary to her.
   Why should Faith be necessary to the soul, when she now sees? Or Hope,
   when she already grasps? But from Charity not only is nothing
   diminished, but rather it receives large increase. For when the soul
   has once seen that unique and unfalsified Beauty, she will love it the
   more, and unless she shall with great love have fastened her gaze
   thereon, nor any way declined from the view, she will not be able to
   abide in that most blessed vision. But while the soul is in this body,
   even though she most fully sees, that is, apprehends God; yet, because
   the bodily senses still have their proper effect, if they have no
   prevalency to mislead, yet they are not without a certain power to call
   in doubt, therefore that may be called Faith whereby these dispositions
   are resisted, and the opposing truth affirmed. Moreover, in this life,
   although the soul is already blessed in the apprehension of God; yet,
   because she endures many irksome pains of the body, she has occasion of
   hope that after death all these incommodities will have ceased to be.
   Therefore neither does Hope, so long as she is in this life, desert the
   soul. But when after this life she shall have wholly collected herself
   in God, Charity remains whereby she is retained there. For neither can
   she be said to have Faith that those things are true, when she is
   solicited by no interruption of falsities; nor does anything remain for
   her to hope, whereas she securely possesses the whole. Three things
   therefore pertain to the soul, that she be sane, that she behold, that
   she see. And other three, Faith, Hope, Charity, for the first and
   second of those three conditions are always necessary: for the third in
   this life all; after this life, Charity alone.

   15. Now listen, so far as the present time requires, while from that
   similitude of sensible things I now teach also something concerning
   God. Namely, God is intelligible, not sensible, intelligible also are
   those demonstrations of the schools; nevertheless they differ very
   widely. For as the earth is visible, so is light; but the earth, unless
   illumined by light, cannot be seen. Therefore those things also which
   are taught in the schools, which no one who understands them doubts in
   the least to be absolutely true, we must believe to be incapable of
   being understood, unless they are illuminated by somewhat else, as it
   were a sun of their own. Therefore as in this visible sun we may
   observe three things: that he is, that he shines, that he illuminates:
   so in that God most far withdrawn whom thou wouldst fain apprehend,
   there are these three things: that He is, that He is apprehended, and
   that He makes other things to be apprehended. These two, God and
   thyself, I dare promise that I can teach thee to understand. But give
   answer how thou receivest these things, as probable, or as true? A. As
   probable certainly; and, as I must own, I have been hoping more: for
   excepting those two illustrations of the line and the globe, nothing
   has been said by thee which I should dare to say that I know. R. It is
   not to be wondered at: for nothing has been yet so set forth, as that
   it exacts of thee perception.

   16. But why do we delay? Let us set out: but first let us see (for this
   comes first) whether we are in a sound state. A. Do thou see to it, if
   either in thyself or in me that hast any discernment of what is to be
   found; I will answer, being inquired of, to my best knowledge. R. Do
   you love anything besides the knowledge of God and yourself? A. I might
   answer, that I love nothing besides, having regard to my present
   feelings; but I should be safer to say that I do not know. For it hath
   often chanced to me, that when I believed I was open to nothing else,
   something nevertheless would come into the mind which stung me
   otherwise than I had presumed. So often, when something, conceived in
   thought, disturbed me little, yet when it came in fact it disquieted me
   more than I supposed: but now I do not see myself sensible to
   perturbation except by three things; by the fear of losing those whom I
   love, by the fear of pain, by the fear of death. R. You love,
   therefore, both a life associated with those dearest to you, and your
   own good health, and your bodily life itself: or you would not fear the
   loss of these. A. It is so, I acknowledge. R. Now therefore, the fact
   that all your friends are not with you, and that your health is not
   very firm, occasions you some uneasiness of mind. For that I see to be
   implied. A. Thou seest rightly; I am not able to deny it. R. How if you
   should suddenly feel and find yourself sound in health, and should see
   all whom you love and who love each other, enjoying in your company
   liberal ease? would you not think it right to give way in reasonable
   measure even to transports of joy? A. In a measure, undoubtedly. Nay,
   if these things, as thou sayest, bechanced me suddenly, how could I
   contain myself? how could I possibly even dissemble joy of such a sort?
   R. As yet, therefore, you are tossed about by all the diseases and
   perturbations of the mind. What shamelessness, then, that with such
   eyes you should wish to see such a Sun! A. Thy conclusion then is, that
   I am utterly ignorant how far I am advanced in health, how far disease
   has receded, or how far it remains. Suppose me to grant this.

   17. R. Do you not see that these eyes of the body, even when sound, are
   often so smitten by the light of this visible sun, as to be compelled
   to turn away and to take refuge in their own obscurity? Now you are
   proposing to yourself what you are moved to seek, but are not proposing
   to yourself what you desire to see: and yet I would discuss this very
   thing with you, what advance you think we have made. Are you without
   desire of riches? A. This at least no longer chiefly. For, being now
   three and thirty years of age, for almost these fourteen years last
   past I have ceased to desire them, nor have I sought anything from
   them, if by chance they should be offered, beyond the necessities of
   life and such a use of them as agrees with the state of a freeman. A
   single book of Cicero has thoroughly persuaded me, that riches are in
   no wise to be craved, but that if they come in our way, they are to be
   with the utmost wisdom and caution administered. R. What of honors? A.
   I confess that it is only lately, and as it were yesterday, that I have
   ceased to desire these. R. What of a wife? Are you not sometimes
   charmed by the image of a beautiful, modest, complying maiden, well
   lettered, or of parts that can easily be trained by you, bringing you
   too (being a despiser of riches) just so large a dowry as will relieve
   your leisure of all burden on her account? It is implied, moreover,
   that you have good hope of coming to no grief through her. A. However
   much thou please to portray her and adorn her with all manner of gifts,
   I have determined that nothing is so much to be avoided by me as such a
   bedfellow: I perceive that nothing more saps the citadel of manly
   strength, whether of mind or body, than female blandishments and
   familiarities. Therefore, if (which I have not yet discovered) it
   appertains to the office of a wise man to desire offspring, whoever for
   this reason only comes into this connection, may appear to me worthy of
   admiration, but in no wise a model for imitation: for there is more
   peril in the essay, than felicity in the accomplishment. Wherefore, I
   believe, I am contradicting neither justice nor utility in providing
   for the liberty of my mind by neither desiring, nor seeking, nor taking
   a wife. R. I inquire not now what thou hast determined, but whether
   thou dost yet struggle, or hast indeed already overcome desire itself.
   For we are considering the soundness of thine eyes. A. Nothing of the
   kind do I any way seek, nothing do I desire; it is even with horror and
   loathing that I recall such things to mind. What more wouldst thou? And
   day by day does this benefit grow upon me: for the more I grow in the
   hope of beholding that supernal Beauty with the desire of which I glow,
   the more my love and delight is wholly converted thereto. R. What of
   pleasant viands? How much do you care for them? A. Those things which I
   have determined not to eat, tempt me not. As to those which I have not
   cut off, I allow that I take pleasure in their present use, yet so that
   without any disturbance of mind, either the sight or the taste of them
   may be withdrawn. And when they are entirely absent, no craving of them
   dares intrude itself to the disturbance of my thoughts. But no need to
   inquire concerning food or drink, or baths: so much of these do I seek
   to have, as is profitable for the confirmation of health.

   18. R. Thou hast made great progress: yet those things which remain in
   order to the seeing of that light, very greatly impede. But I am aiming
   at something which appears to me very easy to be shown; that either
   nothing remains to us to be subdued, or that we have made no advance at
   all, and that the taint of all those things which we believed cut away
   remains. For I ask of thee, if thou wert persuaded that thou couldst
   live with the throng of those dearest to thee in the study and pursuit
   of wisdom on no other terms than as possessed of an estate ample enough
   to meet all your joint necessities; would you not desire and seek for
   wealth? A. I should. R. How, if it should also be clear, that you would
   be to many a master of wisdom, if your authority in teaching were
   supported by civil honor, and that even these your familiars would not
   be able to put a bridle on their cravings except as they too were in
   honor, and that this could only accrue to them through your honors and
   dignity? would not honor then be a worthy object of desire, and of
   strenuous pursuit? A. It is as thou sayest. R. I do not consider the
   question of a wife; for perhaps no such necessity could arise of
   marrying one: although if it were certain that by her ample patrimony
   all those could be sustained whom thou wouldst fain have live at ease
   with thee in one place, and that moreover with her cordial consent,
   especially if she were of a family of such nobility as that through her
   those honors which you have just granted, in our hypothesis, to be
   necessary, could easily be attained, I do not know that it would be any
   part of your duty to contemn these advantages, thus obtained. A. But
   how could I hope for such things?

   19. R. You speak as if I were now inquiring what you hope. I am not
   inquiring what, denied, delights not, but what delights, obtained. For
   an extinguished plague is one thing, a dormant plague another. And, as
   some wise men say, all pools are so unsound, that they always smell of
   every foul thing, although you do not always perceive this, but only
   when you stir them up. And there is a wide difference whether a craving
   is suppressed by hopelessness of compassing it, or is expelled by
   saneness of soul. A. Although I am not able to answer thee, never wilt
   thou, for all this, persuade me that in this affection of mind in which
   I now perceive myself to be, I have advantaged nothing. R. This,
   doubtless, appears so to thee, because although thou mightest desire
   these things, yet they would not seem to thee objects of desire, on
   their own account, but for ulterior ends. A. That is what I was
   endeavoring to say: for when I desired riches, I desired them for this
   reason, that I might be rich. And those honors, the lust of which I
   have declared myself to have but even now thoroughly overcome, I craved
   by a mere delight in some intrinsic splendor I imputed to them; and
   nothing else did I expect in a wife, when I expected, than the
   reputable enjoyment of voluptuousness. Then there was in me a veritable
   craving for those things; now I utterly contemn them all: but if I
   cannot except through these find a passage to those things which in
   effect I desire, I do not pursue them as things to be embraced, but
   accept them as things to be allowed. R. A thoroughly excellent
   distinction: for neither do I impute unworthiness to the desire of any
   lower things that are sought on account of something else.

   20. But I ask of thee, why thou dost desire, either that the persons
   whom thou affectest should live, or that they should live with thee. A.
   That together and concordantly we might inquire out God and our souls.
   For so, whichever first discovers aught, easily introduces his
   companions into it. R. What if these will not inquire? A. I would
   persuade them into the love of it. R. What if you could not, be it that
   they suppose themselves to have already found, or think that such
   things are beyond discovery, or that they are entangled in cares and
   cravings of other things? A. We will use our best endeavors, I with
   them, and they with me. R. What if even their presence impedes you in
   your inquiries? would you not choose and endeavor that they should not
   be with you, rather than be with you on such terms? A. I own it is as
   thou sayest. R. It is not therefore on its own account that you crave
   either their life or presence, but as an auxiliary in the discovery of
   wisdom? A. I thoroughly agree to that. R. Further: if you were certain
   that your own life were an impediment to your comprehension of wisdom,
   should you desire its continuance? A. I should utterly eschew it. R.
   Furthermore: if thou wert taught, that either in this body or after
   leaving it thou couldst equally well attain unto wisdom, wouldst thou
   care whether it was in this or another life that thou didst enjoy that
   which thou supremely affectest? A. If I ascertained that I was to
   experience nothing worse, which would lead me back from the point to
   which I had made progress, I should not care. R. Then thy present dread
   of death rests on the fear of being involved in some worse evil,
   whereby the Divine cognition may be borne away from thee. A. Not solely
   such a possible loss do I dread, if I have any right understanding of
   the fact, but also lest access should be barred me into those things
   which I am now eager to explore; although what I already possess, I
   believe will remain with me. R. Therefore not for the sake of this life
   in itself, but for the sake of wisdom thou dost desire the continuance
   of this life. A. It is the truth.

   21. R. We have pain of body left, which perhaps moves thee of its
   proper force. A. Nor indeed do I grievously dread even that for any
   other reason than that it impedes me in my research. For although of
   late I have been grievously tormented with attacks of toothache, so
   that I was not suffered to revolve aught in my mind except such things
   as I have been engaged in learning; while, as the whole intensity of my
   mind was requisite for new advances, I was entirely restrained from
   making these: yet it seemed to me, that if the essential refulgence of
   Truth would disclose itself to me, I should either not have felt that
   pain, or certainly would have made no account of it. But although I
   have never had anything severer to bear, yet, often reflecting how much
   severer the pains are which I might have to bear, I am sometimes forced
   to agree with Cornelius Celsus, who says that the supreme good is
   wisdom, and the supreme evil bodily pain. For since, says he, we are
   composed of two parts, namely, mind and body, of which the former part,
   the mind, is the better, the body the worse; the highest good is the
   best of the better part, and the chiefest evil the worst of the
   inferior; now the best thing in the mind is wisdom, and the worst thing
   in the body is pain. It is concluded, therefore, and as I fancy, most
   justly, that the chief good of man is to be wise, and his chief evil,
   to suffer pain. R. We will consider this later. For perchance Wisdom
   herself, towards which we strive, will bring us to be of another mind.
   But if she should show this to be true, we will then not hesitate to
   adhere to this your present judgment concerning the highest good and
   the deepest ill.

   22. Now let us inquire concerning this, what sort of lover of wisdom
   thou art, whom thou desirest to behold with most chaste view and
   embrace, and to grasp her unveiled charms in such wise as she affords
   herself to no one, except to her few and choicest rotaries. For
   assuredly a beautiful woman, who had kindled thee to ardent love, would
   never surrender herself to thee, if she had discovered that thou hadst
   in thy heart another object of affection; and shall that most chaste
   beauty of Wisdom exhibit itself to thee, unless thou art kindled for it
   alone? A. Why then am I still made to hang in wretchedness, and put off
   with miserable pining? Assuredly I have already made it plain that I
   love nothing else, since what is not loved for itself is not loved. Now
   I at least love Wisdom for herself alone, while as to other things, it
   is for her sake that I desire their presence or absence, such as life,
   ease, friends. But what measure can the love of that beauty have in
   which I not only do not envy others, but even long for as many as
   possible to seek it, gaze upon it, grasp it and enjoy it with me;
   knowing that our friendship will be the closer, the more thoroughly
   conjoined we are in the object of our love?

   23. R. Such lovers assuredly it is, whom Wisdom ought to have. Such
   lovers does she seek, the love of whom has in it nothing but what is
   pure. But there are various ways of approach to her. For it is
   according to our soundness and strength that each one comprehends that
   unique and truest good. It is a certain ineffable and incomprehensible
   light of minds. Let this light of the common day teach us, as well as
   it can, concerning the higher light. For there are eyes so sound and
   keen, that, as soon as they are first opened, they turn themselves
   unshrinkingly upon the sun himself. To these, as it were, the light
   itself is health, nor do they need a teacher, but only, perchance, a
   warning. For these to believe, to hope, to love is enough. But others
   are smitten by that very effulgence which they vehemently desire to
   see, and when the sight of it is withdrawn often return into darkness
   with delight. To whom, although such as that they may reasonably be
   called sound, it is nevertheless dangerous to insist on showing what as
   yet they have not the power to behold. These therefore should be first
   put in training, and their love for their good is to be nourished by
   delay. For first certain things are to be shown to them which are not
   luminous of themselves, but may be seen by the light, such as a
   garment, a wall, or the like. Then something which, though still not
   shining of itself, yet in the light flames out more gloriously, such as
   gold or silver, yet not so brilliantly as to injure the eyes. Then
   perchance this familiar fire of earth is to be cautiously shown, then
   the stars, then the moon, then the brightening dawn, and the brilliance
   of the luminous sky. Among which things, whether sooner or later,
   whether through the whole succession, or with some steps passed over,
   each one accustoming himself according to his strength, will at last
   without shrinking and with great delight behold the sun. In some such
   way do the best masters deal with those who are heartily devoted to
   Wisdom, and who, though seeing but dimly, yet have already eyes that
   see. For it is the office of a wise training to bring one near to her
   in a certain graduated approach, but to arrive in her presence without
   these intermediary steps is a scarcely credible felicity. But to-day, I
   think we have written enough; regard must be had to health.

   24. And, another day having come, A. Give now, I pray, if thou canst,
   that order. Lead by what way thou wilt, through what things thou wilt,
   how thou wilt. Lay on me things ever so hard, ever so strenuous, and,
   if only they are within my power, I doubt not that I shall perform them
   if only I may thereby arrive whither I long to be. R. There is only one
   thing which I can teach thee; I know nothing more. These things of
   sense are to be utterly eschewed, and the utmost caution is to be used,
   lest while we bear about this body, our pinions should be impeded by
   the viscous distilments of earth, seeing we need them whole and
   perfect, if we would fly from this darkness into that supernal Light:
   which deigns not even to show itself to those shut up in this cage of
   the body, unless they have been such that whether it were broken down
   or worn out it would be their native airs into which they escaped.
   Therefore, whenever thou shalt have become such that nothing at all of
   earthly things delights thee, at that very moment, believe me, at that
   very point of time thou wilt see what thou desirest. A. When shall that
   be, I entreat thee? For I think not that I am able to attain to this
   supreme contempt, unless I shall have seen that in comparison with
   which these things are worthless.

   25. R. In this way too the bodily eye might say: I shall not love the
   darkness, when I shall have seen the sun. For this too seems, as it
   were, to pertain to the right order though it is far otherwise. For it
   loves darkness, for the reason that it is not sound; but the sun,
   unless sound, it is not able to see. And in this the mind is often at
   fault, that it thinks itself and boasts itself sound; and complains, as
   if with good sight, because it does not yet see. But that supernal
   Beauty knows when she should show herself. For she herself discharges
   the office of physician, and better understands who are sound than the
   very ones who are rendered sound. But we, as far as we have emerged,
   seem to ourselves to see; but how far we were plunged in darkness, or
   how far we had made progress, we are not permitted either to think or
   feel, and in comparison with the deeper malady we believe ourselves to
   be in health. See you not how securely yesterday we had pronounced,
   that we were no longer detained by any evil thing, and loved nothing
   except Wisdom; and sought or wished other things only for her sake? To
   thee how low, how foul, how execrable those female embraces seemed,
   when we discoursed concerning the desire of a wife! Certainly in the
   watches of this very night, when we had again been discoursing together
   of the same things, thou didst feel how differently from what thou
   hadst presumed those imaginary blandishments and that bitter sweetness
   tickled thee; far, far less indeed, than is the wont, but also far
   otherwise than thou hadst thought: so that that most confidential
   physician of thine set forth to thee each thing, both how far thou hast
   come on under his care, and what remains to be cured.

   26. A. Peace, I pray thee, peace. Why tormentest thou me? Why diggest
   thou so remorselessly and descendest so deep? Now I weep intolerably,
   henceforth I promise nothing, I presume nothing; question me not
   concerning these things. Most true is what thou sayest, that He whom I
   burn to see Himself knows when I am in health; let Him do what pleaseth
   Him: when it pleaseth Him let Him show Himself; I now commit myself
   wholly to His clemency and care. Once for all do I believe that those
   so affected towards Him He faileth not to lift up. I will pronounce
   nothing concerning my health, except when I shall have seen that
   Beauty. R. Do nothing else, indeed. But now refrain from tears, and
   gird up thy mind. Thou hast wept most sore, and to the great
   aggravation of that trouble of thy breast. A. Wouldest thou set a
   measure to my tears, when I see no measure of my misery? or dost thou
   bid me consider the disease of my body, when I in my inmost self am
   wasted away with pining consumption? But, I pray thee, if thou availest
   aught over me, essay to lead me through some shorter ways, so that, at
   least by some neighbor nearness of that Light, such as, if I have made
   any advance whatever, I shall be able to endure, I may be made ashamed
   of withdrawing my eyes into that darkness which I have left; if indeed
   I can be said to have left a darkness which yet dares to dally with my
   blindness.

   27. R. Let us conclude, if you will, this first volume, that in a
   second we may attempt some such way as may commodiously offer itself.
   For this disposition of yours must not fail to be cherished by
   reasonable exercise. A. I will in no wise suffer this volume to be
   ended, unless thou open to me at least a gleam from the nearness of
   that Light whither I am bound. R. Thy Divine Physician yields so far to
   thy wish. For a certain radiance seizes me, inviting me to conduct thee
   to it. Therefore be intent to receive it. A. Lead, I entreat thee, and
   snatch me away whither thou wilt. R. Thou art sure that thou art minded
   to know the soul, and God? A. That is all my desire. R. Nothing more?
   A. Nothing at all. R. What, do you not wish to comprehend Truth? A. As
   if I could know these things except through her. R. Therefore she first
   is to be known, through whom these things can be known. A. I refuse
   not. R. First then let us see this, whether, as Truth and True are two
   words, you hold that by these two words two things are signified, or
   one thing. A. Two things, I hold. For, as Chastity is one thing, and
   that which is chaste, another, and many things in this manner; so I
   believe that Truth is one thing, and that which, being declared, is
   true, is another. R. Which of these two do you esteem most excellent?
   A. Truth, as I believe. For it is not from that which is chaste that
   Chastity arises, but that which is chaste from Chastity. So also, if
   anything is true, it is assuredly from Truth that it is true.

   28. R. What? When a chaste person dies, do you judge that Chastity dies
   also? A. By no means. R. Then, when anything perishes that is true,
   Truth perishes not. A. But how should anything true perish? For I see
   not. R. I marvel that you ask that question: do we not see thousands of
   things perish before our eyes? Unless perchance you think this tree,
   either to be a tree, but not a true one, or if so to be unable to
   perish. For even if you believe not your senses, and are capable of
   answering, that you are wholly ignorant whether it is a tree; yet this,
   I believe, you will not deny, that it is a true tree, if it is a tree:
   for this judgment is not of the senses, but of the intelligence. For if
   it is a false tree, it is not a tree; but if it is a tree, it cannot
   but be a true one. A. This I allow. R. Then as to the other
   proposition; do you not concede that a tree is of such a sort of
   things, as that it originates and perishes? A. I cannot deny it. R. It
   is con cluded therefore, that something which is true perishes. A. I do
   not dispute it. R. What follows? Does it not seem to thee that when
   true things perish Truth does not perish, as Chastity dies not when a
   chaste person dies? A. I now grant this too, and eagerly wait to see
   what thou art laboring to show. R. Therefore attend. A. I am all
   attention.

   29. R. Does this proposition seem to you to be true: Whatever is, is
   compelled to be somewhere? A. Nothing so entirely wins my consent. R.
   And you confess that Truth is? A. I confess it. R. Then we must needs
   inquire where it is; for it is not in a place, unless perchance you
   think there is something else in a place than a body, or think that
   Truth is a body. A. I think neither of these things. R. Where then do
   you believe her to be? For she is not nowhere, whom we have granted to
   be. A. If I knew where she was, perchance I should seek nothing more.
   R. At least you are able to know where she is not? A. If thou pass in
   review the places, perchance I shall be. R. It is not, assuredly, in
   mortal things. For whatever is, cannot abide in anything, if that does
   not abide in which it is: and that Truth abides, even though true
   things perish, has just been conceded. Truth, therefore, is not in
   mortal things. But Truth is, and is not nowhere. There are therefore
   things immortal. And nothing is true in which Truth is not. It results
   therefore that nothing is true, except those things which are immortal.
   And every false tree is not a tree, and false wood is not wood, and
   false silver is not silver, and everything whatever which is false, is
   not. Now everything which is not true, is false. Nothing therefore is
   rightly said to be, except things immortal. Do you diligently consider
   this little argument, lest there should be in it any point which you
   think impossible to concede. For if it is sound, we have almost
   accomplished our whole business, which in the other book will perchance
   appear more plainly.

   30. A. I thank thee much, and will diligently and cautiously review
   these things in my own mind, and moreover with thee, when we are in
   quiet, if no darkness interfere, and, which I vehemently dread, inspire
   in me delight in itself. R. Steadfastly believe in God, and commit
   thyself wholly to Him as much as thou canst. Be not willing to be as it
   were thine own and in thine own control; but profess thyself to be the
   bondman of that most clement and most profitable Lord. For so will He
   not desist from lifting thee to Himself, and will suffer nothing to
   occur to thee, except what shall profit thee, even though thou know it
   not. A. I hear, I believe, and as much as I can I yield compliance; and
   most intently do I offer a prayer for this very thing, that I may have
   the utmost power, unless perchance thou desirest something more of me.
   R. It is well meanwhile, thou wilt do afterwards what He Himself, being
   now seen, shall require of thee.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Book II.

   1. A. Long enough has our work been intermitted, and impatient is Love,
   nor have tears a measure, unless to Love is given what is loved:
   wherefore, let us enter upon the Second Book. R. Let us enter upon it.
   A. Let us believe that God will be present. R. Let us believe indeed,
   if even this is in our power. A. Our power He Himself is. R. Therefore
   pray most briefly and perfectly, as much as thou canst. A. God, always
   the same, let me know myself, let me know Thee. I have prayed. R. Thou
   who wilt know thyself, knowest thou that thou art? A. I know. R. Whence
   knowest thou? A. I know not. R. Feelest thou thyself to be simple, or
   manifold? A. I know not. R. Knowest thou thyself to be moved? A. I know
   not. R. Knowest thou thyself to think? A. I know. R. Therefore it is
   true that thou thinkest. A. True. R. Knowest thou thyself to be
   immortal? A. I know not. R. Of all these things which thou hast said
   that thou knowest not: which dost thou most desire to know? A. Whether
   I am immortal. R. Therefore thou lovest to live? A. I confess it. R.
   How will the matter stand when thou shalt have learned thyself to be
   immortal? Will it be enough? A. That will indeed be a great thing, but
   that to me will be but slight. R. Yet in this which is but slight how
   much wilt thou rejoice? A. Very greatly. R. For nothing then wilt thou
   weep? A. For nothing at all. R. What if this very life should be found
   such, that in it it is permitted thee to know nothing more than thou
   knowest? Wilt thou refrain from tears? A. Nay verily, I will weep so
   much that life should cease to be. R. Thou dost not then love to live
   for the mere sake of living, but for the sake of knowing. A. I grant
   the inference. R. What if this very knowledge of things should itself
   make thee wretched? A. I do not believe that that is in any way
   possible. But if it is so, no one can be blessed; for I am not now
   wretched from any other source than from ignorance of things. And
   therefore if the knowledge of things is wretchedness, wretchedness is
   everlasting. R. Now I see all which you desire. For since you believe
   no one to be wretched by knowledge, from which it is probable that
   intelligence renders blessed; but no one is blessed unless living, and
   no one lives who is not: thou wishest to be, to live and to have
   intelligence; but to be that thou mayest live, to live that thou mayest
   have intelligence. Therefore thou knowest that thou art, thou knowest
   that thou livest, thou knowest that thou dost exercise intelligence.
   But whether these things are to be always, or none of these things is
   to be, or something abides always, and something falls away, or whether
   these things can be diminished and increased, all things abiding, thou
   desirest to know. A. So it is. R. If therefore we shall have proved
   that we are always to live, it will follow also that we are always to
   be. A. It will follow. R. It will then remain to inquire concerning
   intellection.

   2. A. I see a very plain and compendious order. R. Let this then be the
   order, that you answer my questions cautiously and firmly. A. I attend.
   R. If this world shall always abide, it is true that this world is
   always to abide? A. Who doubts that? R. What if it shall not abide? is
   it not then true that the world is not to abide? A. I dispute it not.
   R. How, when it shall have perished, if it is to perish, will it not
   then be true, that the world has perished? For as long as it is not
   true that the world has come to an end, it has not come to an end: it
   is therefore self-contradictory, that the world is ended and that it is
   not true that the world is ended. A. This too I grant. R. Furthermore,
   does it seem to you that anything can be true, and not be Truth? A. In
   no wise. R. There will therefore be Truth, even though the frame of
   things should pass away. A. I cannot deny it. R. What if Truth herself
   should perish? will it not be true that Truth has perished? A. And even
   that who can deny? R. But that which is true cannot be, if Truth is
   not. A. I have just conceded this. R. In no wise therefore can Truth
   fail. A. Proceed as thou hast begun, for than this deduction nothing is
   truer.

   3. R. Now I will have you answer me, does the soul seem to you to feel
   and perceive, or the body? A. The soul. R. And does the intellect
   appear to you to appertain to the soul? A. Assuredly. R. To the soul
   alone, or to something else? A. I see nothing else besides the soul,
   except God, in which I believe intellect to exist. R. Let us now
   consider that. If any one should tell you that wall was not a wall, but
   a tree, what would you think? A. Either that his senses or mine were
   astray, or that he called a wall by the name of a tree. R. What if he
   received in sense the image of a tree, and thou of a wall? may not both
   be true? A. By no means; because one and the same thing cannot be both
   a tree and a wall. For however individual things might appear different
   to us as individuals, it could not be but that one of us suffered a
   false imagination. R. What if it is neither tree nor wall, and you are
   both in error? A. That, indeed, is possible. R. This one thing
   therefore you had past by above. A. I confess it. R. What if you should
   acknowledge that anything seemed to you other than it is, are you then
   in error? A. No. R. Therefore that may be false which seems, and he not
   be in error to whom it seems. A. It may be so. R. It is to be allowed
   then that he is not in error who sees falsities, but he who assents to
   falsities. A. It is assuredly to be allowed. R. And this falsity,
   wherefore is it false? A. Because it is otherwise than it seems. R. If
   therefore there are none to whom it may seem, nothing is false. A. The
   inference is sound. R. Therefore the falsity is not in the things, but
   in the sense; but he is not beguiled who assents not to false things.
   It results that we are one thing, the sense another; since, when it is
   misled, we are able not to be misled. A. I have nothing to oppose to
   this. R. But when the soul is misled, do you venture to say that you
   are not false? A. How should I venture? R. But there is no sense
   without soul, no falsity without sense. Either therefore the soul
   operates, or cooperates with the falsity. A. Our preceding reasonings
   imply assent to this.

   4. R. Give answer now to this, whether it appears to you possible that
   at some time hereafter falsity should not be. A. How can that seem
   possible to me, when the difficulty of discovering truth is so great
   that it is absurder to say that falsity than that Truth cannot be. R.
   Do you then think that he who does not live, can perceive and feel? A.
   It cannot be. R. It results then, that the soul lives ever. A. Thou
   urgest me too fast into joys: more slowly, I pray. R. But, if former
   inferences are just, I see no ground of doubt concerning this thing. A.
   Too fast, I say. Therefore I am easier to persuade that I have made
   some rash concession, than to become already secure concerning the
   immortality of the soul. Nevertheless evolve this conclusion, and show
   how it has resulted. R. You have said that falsity cannot be without
   sense, and that falsity cannot but be: therefore there is always sense.
   But no sense without soul: therefore the soul is everlasting. Nor has
   it power to exercise sense, unless it lives. Therefore the soul always
   lives.

   5. A. O leaden dagger! For thou mightest conclude that man is immortal
   if I had granted thee that this universe can never be without man, and
   that this universe is eternal. R. You keep a keen look-out. But yet it
   is no small thing which we have established, namely, that the frame of
   things cannot be without the soul, unless perchance in the frame of
   things at some time hereafter there shall be no falsity. A. This
   consequence indeed I allow to be involved. But now I am of opinion that
   we ought to consider farther whether former inferences do not bend
   under pressure. For I see no small step to have been made towards the
   immortality of the soul. R. Have you sufficiently considered whether
   you may not have conceded something rashly? A. Sufficiently indeed, but
   I see no point at which I can accuse myself of rashness. R. It is
   therefore concluded that the frame of things cannot be without a living
   soul. A. So far as this, that in turn some souls may be born, and
   others die. R. What if from the frame of things falsity be taken away?
   will it not come to pass that all things are true? A. I admit the
   inference. R. Tell me whence this wall seems to thee to be true. A.
   Because I am not misled by its aspect. R. That is, because it is as it
   seems. A. Yes. R. If therefore anything is thereby false because it
   seems otherwise than it is, and thereby true because it is as it seems;
   take away him to whom it seems, and there is neither anything false,
   nor true. But if there is no falsity in the frame of things, all things
   are true. Nor can anything seem except to a living soul. There remains
   therefore soul in the frame of things, if falsity cannot be taken away;
   there remains, if it can. A. I see our former conclusions somewhat
   strengthened, indeed; but we have made no progress by this
   amplification. For none the less does that fact remain which chiefly
   shakes me that souls are born and pass away, and that it comes about
   that they are not lacking to the world, not through their immortality,
   but by their succession.

   6. R. Do any corporeal, that is, sensible things, appear to you to be
   capable of comprehension in the intellect? A. They do not. R. What
   then? does God appear to use senses for the cognition of things? A. I
   dare affirm nothing unadvisedly concerning this matter; but as far as
   there is room for conjecture, God in no wise makes use of senses. R. We
   conclude therefore that the only possible subject of sense is the soul.
   A. Conclude provisionally as far as probability permits. R. Well then;
   do you allow that this wall, if it is not a true wall, is not a wall?
   A. I could grant nothing more willingly. R. And that nothing, if it be
   not a true body, is a body? A. This likewise. R. Therefore if nothing
   is true, unless it be so as it seems; and if nothing corporeal can
   appear, except to the senses; and if the only subject of sense is the
   soul; and if no body can be, unless it be a true body: it follows that
   there cannot be a body, unless there has first been a soul. A. Thou
   dost urge me too strongly, and means of resistance fail me.

   7. R. Give now still greater heed. A. Behold me ready. R. Certainly
   this is a stone; and it is true on this condition, if it is not
   otherwise than it seems; and it is not a stone, if it is not true; and
   it cannot seem except to the senses. A. Yes. R. There are not therefore
   stones in the most secluded bosom of the earth, nor anywhere at all
   where there are not those who have the sense of them; nor would this be
   a stone, unless we saw it; nor will it be a stone when we shall have
   departed, and no one else shall be present to see it. Nor, if you lock
   your coffers well, however much you may have shut up in them, will they
   have anything. Nor indeed is wood itself wood interiorly. For that
   escapes all perceptions of sense which is in the depth of an absolutely
   opaque body, and so is in no wise compelled to be. For if it were, it
   would be true; nor is anything true, unless because it is so as it
   appears: but that does not appear; it is not therefore true: unless you
   have something to object to this. A. I see that this results from my
   previous concessions; but it is so absurd, that I would more readily
   deny any one of these, than concede that this is true. R. As you
   please. Consider then which you prefer to say: that corporeal things
   can appear otherwise than to the senses, or that there can be another
   subject of sense than the soul, or that there is a stone or something
   else but that it is not true, or that Truth itself is to be otherwise
   defined. A. Let us, I pray thee, consider this last position.

   8. R. Define therefore the True. A. That is true which is so as it
   appears to the knower, if he will and can know. R. That therefore will
   not be true which no one can know? Then, if that is false which seems
   otherwise than it is; how if to one this stone should seem a stone, to
   another wood? will the same thing be both false and true? A. That
   former position disturbs me more, how, if anything cannot be known, it
   results from that that it is not true. For as to this, that one thing
   is both true and false, I do not much care. For I see one thing,
   compared with diverse things, to be both greater and smaller. From
   which it results, that nothing is more or less of itself. For these are
   terms of comparison. R. But if you say that nothing is true of itself,
   do you not fear the inference, that nothing is of itself? For whereby
   this is wood, thereby is it also true wood. Nor can it be, that of
   itself, that is, without a knower, it should be wood, and should not be
   true wood. A. Therefore thus I say and so I define, nor do I fear lest
   my definition be disapproved on the ground of excessive brevity: for to
   me that seems to be true which is. R. Nothing then will be false,
   because whatever is, is true. A. Thou hast driven me into close
   straits, and I am wholly unprovided of an answer. So it comes to pass
   that whereas I am unwilling to be taught except by these questionings,
   I fear now to be questioned.

   9. R. God, to whom we have commended ourselves, without doubt will
   render help, and set us free from these straits, if only we believe,
   and entreat Him most devoutly. A. Nothing, assuredly, would I do more
   gladly in this place; for never have I been involved in so great a
   darkness. God, Our Father, who exhortest us to pray, who also bringest
   this about, that supplication is made to Thee; since when we make
   supplication to Thee, we live better, and are better: hear me groping
   in these glooms, and stretch forth Thy right hand to me. Shed over me
   Thy light, revoke me from my wanderings; bring Thyself into me that I
   may likewise return into Thee. Amen. R. Be with me now, as far as thou
   mayest, in most diligent attention. A. Utter, I pray, whatever has been
   suggested to thee, that we perish not. R. Give heed. A. Behold, I have
   neither eyes nor ears but for thee.

   10. R. First let us again and yet again ventilate this question, What
   is falsity? A. I wonder if there will turn out to be anything, except
   what is not so as it seems. R. Give heed rather, and let us first
   question the senses themselves. For certainly what the eyes see, is not
   called false, unless it have some similitude of the true. For instance,
   a man whom we see in sleep, is not indeed a true man, but false, by
   this very fact that he has the similitude of a true one. For who,
   seeing a dog, would have a right to say that he had dreamed of a man?
   Therefore too that is thereby a false dog, that it is like a true one.
   A. It is as thou sayest. R. And moreover, if any one waking should see
   a horse and think he saw a man, is he not hereby misled, that there
   appears to him some similitude of a man? For if nothing should appear
   to him except the form of a horse, he cannot think that he sees a man.
   A. I fully concede this. R. We call that also a false tree which we see
   in a picture, and a false face which is reflected from a mirror, and a
   false motion of buildings to men that are sailing from them, and a
   false break in the oar when dipped, for no other reason than the
   verisimilitude in all these things. A. True. R. So we make mistakes
   between twins, so between eggs, so between seals stamped by one ring,
   and other such things. A. I follow and agree to all. R. Therefore that
   similitude of things which pertains to the eyes, is the mother of
   falsity. A. I cannot deny it.

   11. R. But all this forest of facts, unless I am mistaken, may be
   divided into two kinds. For it lies partly in equal, partly in inferior
   things. They are equal, when we say that this is as like to that as
   that to this, as is said of twins, or impressions of a ring. Inferior,
   when we say that the worse is like the better. For who, looking in a
   mirror, would dream of saying that he is like that image, and not
   rather that like him? And this class consists partly in what the soul
   undergoes, and partly in those things which are seen. And that again
   which the soul undergoes, it either undergoes in the sense, as the
   unreal motion of a building; or in itself from that which it has
   received from the senses, such as are the dreams of dreamers, and
   perhaps also of madmen. Furthermore, those things which appear in the
   things themselves which we see, are some of them from nature, and some
   expressed and framed by living creatures. Nature either by procreation
   or reflection effects inferior similitudes. By procreation, when to
   parents children like them are born; by reflection, as from mirrors of
   various kinds. For although it is men that make the most of the
   mirrors, yet it is not they that frame the images given back. On the
   other hand, the works of living creatures are seen in pictures, and
   creations of the like kind: in which may also be included (conceding
   their occurrence) those things which demons produce. But the shadows of
   bodies, because with but a slight stretch of language they may be
   described as like their bodies and a sort of false bodies, nor can be
   disputed to be submitted to the judgment of the eyes, may reasonably be
   placed in that class, which are brought about by nature through
   reflection. For every body exposed to the light reflects, and casts a
   shadow in the opposite direction. Or do you see any objection to be
   made? A. None. I am only awaiting anxiously the issue of these
   illustrations.

   12. R. We must, however, wait patiently, until the remaining senses
   also make report to us that falsity dwells in the similitude of the
   true. For in the sense of hearing likewise there are almost as many
   sorts of similitudes: as when, hearing the voice of a speaker, whom we
   do not see, we think it some one else, whom in voice he resembles; and
   in inferior similitudes Echo is a witness, or that well-known roaring
   of the ears themselves, or in timepieces a certain imitation of thrush
   or crow, or such things as dreamers or lunatics imagine themselves to
   hear. And it is incredible how much false tones, as they are called by
   musicians, bear witness to the truth, which will appear hereinafter:
   yet they too (which will suffice just now) are not remote from a
   resemblance to those which men call true. Do you follow this? A. And
   most delightedly. For here I have no trouble to understand. R. Then, to
   press on, do you think it is easy, by the smell, to distinguish lily
   from lily, or by the taste honey from honey, gathered alike from thyme,
   though brought from different hives, or by the touch to note the
   difference between the softness of the plumage of the goose and of the
   swan? A. It does not seem easy. R. And how is it when we dream that we
   either smell or taste, or touch such things? Are we not then deceived
   by a similitude of effects and images, inferior in proportion to its
   emptiness? A. Thou speakest truly. R. Therefore it appears that we, in
   all our senses, whether by equality or inferiority of likeness, are
   either misled by cozening similitude, or even if we are not misled, as
   suspending our consent, or discovering the difference, yet that we name
   those things false which we apprehend as like the true. A. I cannot
   doubt it.

   13. R. Now give heed, while we run over the same things once more, that
   what we are endeavoring to show may come more plainly to view. A. Lo,
   here I am, speak what thou wilt. For I have once for all resolved to
   endure this circuitous course, nor will I be wearied out in it, hoping
   so ardently to arrive at length whither I perceive that we are tending.
   R. You do well. But take note whether it seems to you, when we see a
   resemblance in eggs, that we can justly say that any one of them is
   false. A. Far from it. For if all are eggs, they are true eggs. R. And
   when we see an image reflected from a mirror, by what signs do we
   apprehend it to be false? A. By the fact that it cannot be grasped,
   gives forth no sound, does not move independently, does not live, and
   by innumerable other properties, which it were tedious to detail. R. I
   see you are averse to delay, and regard must be borne to your haste.
   Then, not to recall every particular, if those men also whom we see in
   dreams, were able to live, speak, be grasped by waking men, and there
   were no difference between them and those whom when awake and sane we
   address and see, should we then have any reason to call them false? A.
   What possible right could we have to do so? R. Therefore if they were
   true, in exact proportion as they were likest the truth, and as no
   difference existed between them and the true and false so far as they
   were, by those or other differences, convicted of being dissimilar;
   must it not be confessed that similitude is the mother of truth, and
   dissimilitude of falsehood? A. I have no answer to make, and I am
   ashamed of my former so hasty assent.

   14. R. It is ridiculous if you are ashamed, as if it were not for this
   very reason that we have chosen this mode of discourse: which, since we
   are talking with ourselves alone, I wish to be called and inscribed
   Soliloquies; a new name, it is true, and perhaps a grating one, but not
   ill suited for setting forth the fact. For since Truth can not be
   better sought than by asking and answering, and scarcely any one can be
   found who does not take shame to be worsted in debate, and so it almost
   always happens that when a matter is well brought into shape for
   discussion, it is exploded by some unreasonable clamor and petulance,
   and angry feeling, commonly dissembled, indeed, but sometimes plainly
   expressed; it has been, as I think, most advantageous, and most
   answerable to peace, that the resolution was made by thee to seek truth
   in the way of question by me and answer by thee: wherefore there is no
   reason why you should fear, if at any point you have unadvisedly tied
   yourself up, to return and undo the knots; for otherwise there is no
   escape from hence.

   15. A. Thou speakest rightly; but what I have granted amiss I
   altogether fail to see: unless perchance that that is rightly called
   false which has some similitude of the true, since assuredly nothing
   else occurs to me worthy of the name of false; and yet again I am
   compelled to confess that those things which are called false are so
   called by the fact that they differ from the true. From which it
   resuits that that very dissimilitude is the cause of the falsity.
   Therefore I am disquieted; for I cannot easily call to mind anything
   that is engendered by contrary causes. R. What if this is the one and
   only kind in the universe of things which is so? Or are you ignorant,
   that in running over the innumerable species of animals, the crocodile
   alone is found to move its upper jaw in eating; especially as scarcely
   anything can be discovered so like to another thing, that it is not
   also in some point unlike it? A. I see that indeed; but when I consider
   that that which we call false has both something like and something
   unlike the true, I am not able to make out on which side it chiefly
   merits the name of false. For if I say: on the side on which it is
   unlike; there will be nothing which cannot be called false: for there
   is nothing which is not dissimilar to some thing, which we concede to
   be true. And again, if I shall say, that it is to be called false on
   that side on which it is similar; not only will those eggs cry out
   against us which are true on the very ground of their excessive
   similarity, but even so I shall not escape from his grasp who may
   compel me to confess that all things are false because I cannot deny
   that all things are on some side or other similar to each other. But
   suppose me not afraid to give this answer, that likeness and unlikeness
   alike give a right to call anything false; what way of escape wilt thou
   give me? For none the less will the fatal necessity hang over me of
   proclaiming all things false; since, as has been said above, all things
   are found to be both similar, on some side, and dissimilar, on some
   side, to each other. My only remaining resource would be to declare
   nothing else false, except what was other than it seemed, unless I
   shrank from again encountering all those monsters, which I flattered
   myself that I had long since sailed away from. For a whirlpool again
   seizes me at unawares, and brings me round to own that to be true which
   is as it seems. From which it results that without a knower nothing can
   be true: where I have to fear a shipwreck on deeply hidden rocks, which
   are true, although unknown. Or, if I shall say that that is true which
   is, it follows, let who will oppose, that there is nothing false
   anywhere. And so I see the same breakers before me again, and see that
   all my patience of thy delays has helped me forward nothing at all.

   16. R. Attend rather; for never can I be persuaded, that we have
   implored the Divine aid in vain. For I see that, having tried all
   things as far as we could, we found nothing to remain, which could
   rightly be called false, except what either feigns itself to be what it
   is not, or, to include all, tends to be and is not. But that former
   kind of falsity is either fallacious or mendacious. For that is rightly
   called fallacious which has a certain appetite of deceiving; which
   cannot be understood as without a soul: but this results in part from
   reason, in part from nature; from reason, in rational creatures, as in
   men; from nature, in beasts, as in the fox. But what I call mendacious,
   proceeds from those who utter falsehood. Who in this point differ from
   the fallacious, that all the fallacious seek to mislead; but not every
   one who utters falsehood, wishes to mislead; for both mimes and
   comedies and many poems are full of falsehoods, rather with the purpose
   of delighting than of misleading, and almost all those who jest utter
   falsehood. But he is rightly called fallacious, whose purpose is, that
   somebody should be deceived. But those who do not aim to deceive, but
   nevertheless feign somewhat, are mendacious only, or if not even this,
   no one at least doubts that they are to be called pleasant falsifiers:
   unless you have something to object.

   17. A. Proceed, I pray; for now perchance thou hast begun to teach
   concerning falsities not falsely: but now I am considering of what sort
   that class of falsities may be, of which thou hast said, It tends to
   be, and is not. R. Why should you not consider? They are the same
   things, which already we have largely passed review. Does not thy image
   in the mirror appear to will to be thou thyself, but to be therefore
   false, because it is not? A. This does, in very deed, seem so. R. And
   as to pictures, and all such expressed resemblances, every such thing
   wrought by the artist? Do they not press to be that, after whose
   similitude they have been made? A. I must certainly own this to be
   true. R. And you will allow, I believe, that the deceits under which
   dreamers, or madmen suffer, are to be included in this kind. A. None
   more: for none tend more to be such things as the waking and the sane
   discern; and yet they are hereby false, because that which they tend to
   be they cannot be. R. Why need I now say more concerning the gliding
   towers, or the dipped oar, or the shadows of bodies? It is plain, as I
   think, that they are to be measured by this rule. A. Most evidently
   they are. R. I say nothing concerning the remaining senses; for no one
   by consideration will fail to find this, that in the various things
   which are subject to our sense, that is called false which tends to be
   anything and is not.

   18. A. Thou speakest rightly; but I wonder why thou wouldst separate
   from this class those poems and jests, and other imitative trifles. R.
   Because forsooth it is one thing to will to be false, and another not
   to be able to be true. Therefore these works of men themselves, such as
   comedies or tragedies, or mimes, and other such things, we may include
   with the works of painters and sculptors. For a painted man cannot be
   so true, however much he may tend into the form of man, as those things
   which are written in the books of the comic poets. For neither do they
   will to be false, nor are they false by any appetite of their own; but
   by a certain necessity, so far as they have been able to follow the
   mind of the author. But on the stage Roscius in will was a false
   Hecuba, in nature a true man; but by that will also a true tragedian,
   in that he was fulfilling the thing proposed: but a false Priam, in
   that he made himself like Priam, but was not he. From which now arises
   a certain marvellous thing, which nevertheless no one doubts to be so.
   A. What, pray, is it? R. What think you, unless that all these things
   are in certain aspects true, by this very thing that they are in
   certain aspects false, and that for their quality of truth this alone
   avails them, that they are false in another regard? Whence to that
   which they either will or ought to be, they in no wise attain, if they
   avoid being false. For how could he whom I have mentioned have been a
   true tragedian, had he been unwilling to be a false Hector, a false
   Andromache, a false Hercules, and innumerable other things? or how
   would a picture, for instance, be a true picture, unless it were a
   false horse? or how could there be in a mirror a true image of a man,
   if it were not a false man? Wherefore, if it avails some things that
   they be somewhat false in order that they may be somewhat true; why do
   we so greatly dread falsity, and seek truth as the greatest good? A. I
   know not, and I greatly marvel, unless because in these examples I see
   nothing worthy of imitation. For not as actors, or specular
   reflections, or Myron's brazen cows, ought we, in order that we may be
   true in some character of our own, to be outlined and accommodated to
   the personation of another; but to seek that truth, which is not, as if
   laid out on a bifronted and self-repugnant plan, false on one side that
   it may be true on the other. R. High and Divine are the things which
   thou requirest. Yet if we shall have found them, shall we not confess
   that of these things is Truth itself made up, and as it were brought
   into being from their fusion--Truth, from which every thing derives its
   name which in any way is called true? A. I yield no unwilling assent.

   19. R. What then think you? Is the science of debate true, or false? A.
   True, beyond controversy. But Grammar too is true. R. In the same sense
   as the former? A. I do not see what is truer than the true. R. That
   assuredly which has nothing of false: in view of which a little while
   ago thou didst take umbrage at those things which, be it in this way or
   that, unless they were false, could not be true. Or do you not know,
   that all those fabulous and openly false things appertain to Grammar?
   A. I am not ignorant of that indeed; but, as I judge, it is not through
   Grammar that they are false, but through it, that, whatever they may
   be, they are interpreted. Since a drama is a falsehood composed for
   utility or delight. But Grammar is a science which is the guardian and
   moderatrix of articulate speech: whose profession involves the
   necessity of collecting even all the figments of the human tongue,
   which have been committed to memory and letters, not making them false,
   but teaching and enforcing concerning these certain principles of true
   interpretation. R. Very just: I care not now, whether or not these
   things have been well defined and distinguished by thee; but this I
   ask, whether it is Grammar itself, or that science of debate which
   shows this to be so. A. I do not deny that the force and skill of
   definition, whereby I have now endeavored to separate these things, is
   to be attributed to the art of disputation.

   20. R. How as to Grammar itself? if it is true, is it not so far true
   as it is a discipline? For the name of Discipline signifies something
   to be learnt: but no one who has learned and who retains what he
   learns, can be said not to know; and no one knows falsities. Therefore
   every discipline and science is true. A. I see not what rashness there
   can be in assenting to this brief course of reasoning. But I am
   disturbed lest it should bring any one to suppose those dramas to be
   true; for these also we learn and retain. R. Was then our master
   unwilling that we should believe what he taught, and know it? A. Nay,
   he was thoroughly in earnest that we should know it. R. And did he,
   pray, ever set out to have us believe that Dædalus flew? A. That,
   indeed, never. But assuredly unless we remembered the poem, he took
   such order that we were scarcely able to hold anything in our hands. R.
   Do you then deny it to be true that there is such a poem, and that such
   a tradition is spread abroad concerning Dædalus? A. I do not deny this
   to be true. R. You do not then deny that you learned the truth, when
   you learned these things. For if it is true that Dædalus flew, and boys
   should receive and recite this as a feigning fable, they would be
   laying up falsities in mind by the very fact that the things were true
   which they recited. For from this results what we were admiring above,
   that there could not be a true fiction turning on the flight of
   Dædalus, unless it were false that Dædalus flew. A. I now grasp that;
   but what good is to come of it, I do not yet see. R. What, unless that
   that course of reasoning is not false, whereby we gather that a
   science, unless it is true, cannot be a science? A. And what does this
   signify? R. Because I wish to have you tell me on what the science of
   Grammar rests: for the truth of the science rests on that very
   principle which makes it a science. A. I know not what to answer thee.
   R. Does it not seem to you, that if nothing in it had been defined, and
   nothing distributed and distinguished into classes and parts, it could
   not in any wise be a true science? A. Now I grasp thy meaning: nor does
   the remembrance of any science whatever occur to me, in which
   definitions and divisions and processes of reasoning do not, inasmuch
   as it is declared what each thing is, as without confusion of parts its
   proper attributes are ascribed to each class, nothing peculiar to it
   being neglected, nothing alien to it admitted, perform that whole range
   of functions from which it has the name of Science. R. That whole range
   of functions therefore from which it has the name of true. A. I see
   this to be implied.

   21. R. Tell me now what science contains the principles of definitions,
   divisions and partitions. A. It has been said above that these are
   contained in the rules of disputation. R. Grammar therefore, both as a
   science, and as a true science, has been created by the same art which
   has above been defended from the charge of falsity. Which conclusion I
   am not required to confine to Grammar alone, but am permitted to extend
   to all sciences whatever. For you have said, and truly said, that no
   science occurs to you, in which the law of defining and distributing
   does not lie at the very foundation of its character as a science. But
   if they are true on that ground on which they are sciences, will any
   one deny that very thing to be truth through which all the sciences are
   true? A. Assuredly I find it hard to withhold assent: but this gives me
   pause, that we reckon among the sciences even that theory of
   disputation. Wherefore I judge that rather to be truth, whereby this
   theory itself is true. R. Your watchful accuracy is indeed most highly
   to be commended: but you do not deny, I suppose, that it is true on the
   same ground on which it is a theory and science. A. Nay, that is my
   very ground of perplexity. For I have noted that it also is a science,
   and is on this account called true. R. What then? Do you think this
   could be a science on any other ground than that all things in it were
   defined and distributed? A. I have nothing else to say. R. But if this
   function appertains to it, it is in and of itself a true science. Why
   then should any one find it wonderful, if that truth whereby all things
   are true, should be through itself and in itself true? A. Nothing
   stands now in the way of my giving an unreserved assent to that
   opinion.

   22. R. Attend therefore to the few things that remain. A. Bring forth
   whatever thou hast, if only it be such as I can understand, and I will
   willingly agree. R. We do not forget, that to say that anything is in
   anything, is capable of a double sense. It may mean that it is so in
   such a sense as that it can also be disjoined and be elsewhere, as this
   wood in this place, or the sun in the East. Or it may mean anything is
   so in a subject, that it cannot be separated from it, as in this wood
   the shape and visible appearance, as in the sun the light, as in fire
   heat, as in the mind discipline, and such like. Or seems it otherwise
   to thee? A. These distinctions are indeed most thoroughly familiar to
   us, and from early youth most studiously made an element of thought;
   wherefore, if asked about these, I must needs grant the position at
   once. R. But do you not concede that if the subject do not abide, that
   which is in the subject cannot inseparably abide? A. This also I see
   necessary: for, the subject remaining, that which is in the subject may
   possibly not remain, as any one with a little thought can perceive.
   Since the color of this body of mine may, by reason of health or age,
   suffer change, though the body has not yet perished. And this is not
   equally true of all things, but of those whose coexistence with the
   subject is not necessary to the existence of the subject. For it is not
   necessary that this wall, in order to be a wall, should be of this
   color, which we see in it; for even if, by some chance, it should
   become black or white, or should undergo some other change of color, it
   would nevertheless remain a wall and be so called. But if fire were
   without heat, it will not even be fire; nor can we talk of snow except
   as being white.

   23. But as to thy question, who would grant, or to whom could it appear
   possible, that that which is in the subject should remain, while the
   subject perished? For it is monstrous and most utterly foreign to the
   truth that what would not be unless it were in the subject, could be
   even when the subject itself was no more. R. Then that which we were
   seeking is found. A. What dost thou mean? R. What you hear. A. And is
   it then now clearly made out that the mind is immortal? R. If these
   things which you have granted are true, with most indisputable
   clearness: unless perchance you would say that the mind, even though it
   die, is still the mind. A. I, at least, will never say that; but by
   this very fact that it perishes it then comes about that it is not the
   mind, is what I do say. Nor am I shaken in this opinion because it has
   been said by great philosophers that that thing which, wherever it
   comes, affords life, cannot admit death into itself. For although the
   light wheresoever it has been able to gain entrance, makes that place
   luminous, and, by virtue of that memorable force of contrarieties,
   cannot admit darkness into itself; yet it is extinguished, and that
   place is by its extinction made dark. So that which resisted the
   darkness, neither in any way admitted the darkness into it, and yet
   made place for it by perishing, as it could have made place for it by
   departing. Therefore I fear lest death should befall the body in such
   wise as darkness a place, the mind, like light, sometimes departing,
   but sometimes being extinguished on the spot; so that now not
   concerning every death of the body is there security, but a particular
   kind of death is to be chosen, by which the soul may be conducted out
   of the body unharmed, and guided to a place, if there is any such
   place, where it cannot be extinguished. Or, if not even this may be,
   and the mind, as it were a light, is kindled in the body itself, nor
   has capacity to endure elsewhere, and every death is a sort of
   extinction of the soul in the body, or of the life; some sort is to be
   chosen by which, so far as man is allowed, life, while it is lived, may
   be lived in security and tranquillity, although I know not how that can
   come to pass if the soul dies. O greatly blessed they, who, whether
   from themselves, or from whom you will, have gained the persuasion,
   that death is not to be feared, even if the soul should perish! But,
   wretched me, no reasonings, no books, have hitherto been able to
   persuade of this.

   24. R. Groan not, the human mind is immortal. A. How dost thou prove
   it? R. From those things which you have granted above, with great
   caution. A. I do not indeed recall to mind any want of vigilance in my
   admissions when questioned by thee: but now gather all into one sum, I
   pray thee; let us see at what point we have arrived after so many
   circuits, nor would I have thee in doing so question me. For if thou
   art about to enumerate concisely those things which I have granted, why
   is my response again desired? Or is it that thou wouldst wantonly
   torture me by delays of joy, if we have in fact achieved any solid
   result? R. I will do that which I see that thou dost wish, but attend
   most diligently. A. Speak now, here I am; why slayest thou me? R. If
   everything which is in the subject always abides, it follows of
   necessity that the subject itself always abides. And every discipline
   is in the subject mind. It is necessary therefore that the mind should
   continue forever, if the science continues forever. Now Science is
   Truth, and always, as in the beginning of this book Reason hath
   convinced thee, does Truth abide. Therefore the mind lasts forever, nor
   dead, could it be called the mind. He therefore alone can escape
   absurdity in denying the mind to be immortal, who can prove that any of
   the foregoing concessions have been made without reason.

   25. A. And now I am ready to plunge into the expected joys, but yet I
   am held hesitating by two thoughts. For, first, it makes me uneasy that
   we have used so long a circuit, following out I know not what chain of
   reasonings, when the whole matter of discourse admitted of so brief a
   demonstration, as has now been shown. Wherefore, it renders me anxious
   that the discourse has so long held so wary a step, as if with some
   design of setting an ambush. Next, I do not see how a science is always
   in the mind, when, on the one hand, so few are familiar with it, and,
   on the other, whoever does know it, was during so long a time of early
   childhood unacquainted with it. For we can neither say that the minds
   of the untaught are not minds, nor that that science is in their mind
   of which they are ignorant. And if this is utterly absurd, it results
   that either the science is not always in the mind, or that that science
   is not Truth.

   26. R. Thou mayest note that it is not for naught that our reasoning
   has taken so wide a round. For we were inquiring what is Truth, which
   not even now, in this very forest of thoughts and things, beguiling our
   steps into an infinity of paths, have we, as I see, been able to track
   out to the end. But what are we to do? Shall we desist from our
   undertaking, and wait in hope that some book or other may fall into our
   hands, which may satisfy this question? For many, I think, have written
   before our age, whom we have not read: and now, to give no guess at
   what we do not know, we see plainly that there is much writing upon
   this theme, both in verse and prose; and that by men whose writings
   cannot be unknown to us, and whose genius we know to be such, that we
   cannot despair of finding in their works what we require: especially
   when here before our eyes is he in whom we have recognized that
   eloquence for which we mourned as dead, to have revived in vigorous
   life. Will he suffer us, after having in his writings taught us the
   true manner of living, to remain ignorant of the true nature of living?
   A. I indeed do not think so, and hope much from thence but one matter
   of grief I have, that we have not opportunity of opening to him our
   zealous affection either towards him or towards Wisdom. For assuredly
   he would pity our thirst and would overflow much more quickly than now.
   For he is secure, because he has now won a full conviction of the
   immortality of the soul, and perhaps knows not that there are any, who
   have only too well experienced the misery of this ignorance, and whom
   it is cruel not to aid, especially when they entreat it. But that other
   knows indeed from old familiarity our ardor of longing; but he is so
   far removed, and we are so circumstanced, that we have scarcely the
   opportunity of so much as sending a letter to him. Whom I believe to
   have lately in Transalpine retirement composed a spell, under whose ban
   the fear of death is compelled to flee, and the cold stupor of the
   soul, indurate with lasting ice, is expelled. But in the meantime,
   while these helps are leisurely making their way hither, a benefit
   which it is not in our power to command, is it not most unworthy that
   our leisure should be wasting, and our very mind hang wholly dependent
   on the uncertain decision of another's will?

   27. What shall we say to this, that we have entreated God and do
   entreat, that He will show us a way, not to riches, not to bodily
   pleasures, not to popular honors and seats of state, but to the
   knowledge of our own soul, and that He will likewise disclose Himself
   to them that seek Him? Will He, indeed, forsake us, or shall He be
   forsaken by us? R. Most utterly foreign to Him is it indeed, that He
   should desert them who desire such things: whence also it ought to be
   strange to our thoughts that we should desert so great a Guide.
   Wherefore, if you will, let us briefly go over the considerations from
   which either proposition results, either that Truth always abides, or
   that Truth is the theory of argumentation. For you have said that these
   points wavered in your mind, so as to make us less secure of the final
   conclusion of the whole matter. Or shall we rather inquire this, how a
   science can be in an untrained mind, which yet we cannot deny to be a
   mind? For this seemed to give you uneasiness, so as to involve you
   again in doubt as to your previous concessions. A. Nay, let us first
   discuss the two former propositions, and then we will consider the
   nature of this latter fact. For so, as I judge, no controversy will
   remain. R. So be it, but attend with the utmost heed and caution. For I
   know what happens to you as you listen, namely, that while you are too
   intent upon the conclusion, and expecting that now, or now, it will be
   drawn, you grant the points implied in my questions without a
   sufficiently diligent scrutiny. A. Perchance thou speakest the truth;
   but I shall strive against this kind of disease as much as I can: only
   begin thou now to inquire of me, that we linger not over things
   superfluous.

   28. R. From this truth, as I remember, that Truth cannot perish, we
   have concluded, that not only if the whole world should perish, but
   even if Truth itself should, it will still be true that both the world
   and Truth have perished. Now there is nothing true without truth: in no
   wise therefore does Truth perish. A. I acknowledge all this, and shall
   be greatly surprised if it turns out false. R. Let us then consider
   that other point. A. Suffer me, I pray thee, to reflect a little, lest
   I should soon come back in confusion. R. Will it therefore not be true
   that Truth has perished? If it will not be true, then Truth does not
   perish. If it were true, where, after the fall of Truth, will be the
   true, when now there is no truth? A. I have no further occasion for
   thought and consideration; proceed to something else. Assuredly we will
   take order, so far as we may, that learned and wise men may read these
   musings, and may correct our unadvisedness, if they shall find any: for
   as to myself, I do not believe that either now or hereafter I shall be
   able to discover what can be said against this.

   29. R. Is Truth then so called for any other reason than as being that
   by which everything is true which is true? A. For no other reason. R.
   Is it rightly called true for any ground than that it is not false? A.
   To doubt this were madness. R. Is that not false which is accommodated
   to the similitude of anything, yet is not that the likeness of which it
   appears? A. Nothing indeed do I see which I would more willingly call
   false. But yet that is commonly called false, which is far removed from
   the similitude of the true. R. Who denies it? But yet because it
   implies some imitation of the true. A. How? For when it is said, that
   Medea flew away with winged snakes harnessed to her car, that thing on
   no side imitates truth; inasmuch as the thing is naught, nor can that
   thing imitate aught, when itself is absolutely nothing. R. You say
   right; but you do not note that that thing which is absolutely nothing,
   cannot even be called false. For if it is false, it is: if it is not,
   it is not false. A. Shall we not then say that monstrous story of Medea
   is false? R. Assuredly not; for if it is false, how is it a monstrous
   story? A. Admirable! Then when I say

   "The mighty winged snakes I fasten to my car,"

   do I not say false? R. You do, assuredly: for that is which you say to
   be false. A. What, I pray? R. That sentence, forsooth, which is
   contained in the verse itself. A. And pray what imitation of truth has
   that? R. Because it would bear the same tenor, even if Medea had truly
   done that thing. Therefore in its very terms a false sentence imitates
   true sentences. Which, if it is not believed, in this alone does it
   imitate true ones, that it is expressed as they, and it is only false,
   it is not also misleading. But if it obtains faith, it imitates also
   those sentences which, being true, are believed true. A. Now I perceive
   that there is a great difference between those things which we say and
   those things concerning which we say aught; wherefore I now assent: for
   this proposition alone held me back, that whatever we call false is not
   rightly so called, unless it have an imitation of something true. For
   who, calling a stone false silver, would not be justly derided? Yet if
   any one should declare a stone to be silver, we say that he speaks
   falsely, that is, that he utters a false sentence. But it is not, I
   think, unreasonable that we should call tin or lead false silver,
   because the thing itself, as it were, imitates that: nor is our
   sentence declaring this therefore false, but that very thing concerning
   which it is pronounced.

   30. R. You apprehend the matter well. But consider this, whether we can
   also with propriety call silver by the name of false lead. A. Not in my
   opinion. R. Why so? A. I know not; except that I see that it would be
   altogether against my will to have it so called. R. Is it perchance for
   the reason that silver is the better, and such a name would be
   contemptuous of it; but it confers a certain honor, as it were, on
   lead, if it should be called false silver? A. Thou hast expressed
   exactly what I had in mind. And therefore I believe that it is with
   good right that those are held infamous and incapable of bearing
   witness, who flaunt themselves in female attire, whom I know not
   whether I should more reasonably call false women, or false men. True
   actors, however, and truly infamous, without doubt we can call them;
   or, if they lurk unseen, and if infamy implies an evil repute, we may
   call them not without truth, true specimens of worthlessness. R. We
   shall have another opportunity of discussing these things: for many
   things are done, which in the mere guise of them appear base, yet, done
   for some praiseworthy end, are shown to be honorable. And it is a great
   question whether one, for the sake of liberating his country, ought to
   put on a woman's garment to deceive the enemy, being, perhaps, by the
   very fact that he is a false woman, apt to be shown the truer man: and
   whether a wise man who in some way may have certainly ascertained that
   his life will be necessary to the interests of mankind, ought to choose
   rather to die of cold, than to indue himself in female vestments, if he
   can find no other. But concerning this, as has been said, we will
   consider hereafter. For unquestionably thou discernest how careful an
   inquisition it requires, how far such things can be carried, without
   falling into various inexcusable basenesses. But now--which suffices
   for the present question--I think it is now evident, and beyond doubt,
   that there is not anything false except by some imitation of the true.

   31. A. Go on to what remains; for of this I am well convinced. R. Then
   I ask this, whether, besides the sciences in which we are instructed,
   and in which it is fitting that the study of wisdom itself should be
   included, we can find anything so true, that it is not, like that
   Achilles of the stage, false on one side, that it may be true on
   another? A. To me, indeed, many such things appear capable of being
   found. For no sciences contain this stone, nor yet, that it may be a
   true stone, does it imitate anything according to which it would be
   called false. Which one thing being mentioned, thou seest there is
   opportunity to dwell upon things innumerable, which of themselves occur
   to the thought. R. I see, I see. But do they not seem to thee to be
   included in the one name of Body? A. They might so seem, if either I
   had ascertained the inane to be nothing, or thought that the mind
   itself ought to be numbered among bodies, or believed that God also is
   a body. If all these things are, I see them not to be false and true in
   imitation of anything. R. You send us a long journey, but I will use
   all compendious speed. For certainly what you call the Inane is one
   thing, what you call Truth another. A. Widely diverse, indeed. For what
   more inane than I, if I think Truth anything inane, or so greatly seek
   after aught inane? For what else than Truth do I desire to find? R.
   Therefore perchance you grant this too, that nothing is true which does
   not by Truth come to be true. A. This became manifest at an early
   stage. R. Do you doubt that nothing is inane except the Inane itself,
   or certainly that a body is not inane? A. I do not doubt it at all. R.
   I suppose therefore, you believe that Truth is some sort of body. A. In
   no wise. R. What is a body? A. I know not; no matter: for I think thou
   knowest that even that inane, if it is inane, is more completely so
   where there is no body. R. This assuredly is plain. A. Why then do we
   delay? R. Does it then seem to thee either that Truth made the inane,
   or that there is anything true where Truth is not? A. Neither seems
   true. R. The inane therefore is not true, because neither could it
   become inane by that which is not inane: and it is manifest that what
   is void of truth is not true; and, in fine, that very thing which is
   called inane, is so called because it is nothing. How therefore can
   that be true which is not or how can that be which is absolutely
   nothing? A. Well then, let us desert the inane as being inane.

   32. R. What sayest thou concerning the rest? A. What? R. Because you
   see how much stands on my side. For we have remaining the Soul and God.
   And if these two are true for the reason that Truth is in them of the
   immortality of God no one doubts. But the mind is believed immortal, if
   Truth which cannot perish, is proved to be in it. Wherefore let as
   consider this last point, whether the body be not truly true, that is,
   whether there be in it, not Truth, but a certain image of Truth. For if
   even in the body, which we know to be perishable, we find such an
   element of truth, as there is in the sciences, it does not then so
   certainly follow, that the art of discussion is Truth, whereby all
   sciences are true. For true is even the body, which does not seem to
   have been formed by the force of argument. But if even the body is true
   by a certain imitation, and is on this account, not absolutely and
   purely true, there will then, perchance, be nothing to hinder the
   theory of argument from being taught to be Truth itself. A. Meanwhile
   let us inquire concerning the body; for not even when this shall have
   been settled, do I see a prospect of ending this controversy. R. Whence
   knowest thou what God purposes? Therefore attend: for I at least think
   the body to be contained in a certain form and guise, which if it had
   not, it would not be the body; if it had it in truth, it would be the
   mind. Or does the fact stand otherwise? A. I assent in part, of the
   rest I doubt; for, unless some figure is maintained, I grant that it is
   not a body. But how, if it had it in truth, it would be the mind, I do
   not well understand. R. Do you then remember nothing concerning the
   exordium of this book, and that Geometry of yours? A. Thou hast
   mentioned it to purpose; I do indeed remember, and am most willing to
   do so. R. Are such figures found in bodies, as that science
   demonstrates? A. Nay, it is incredible how greatly inferior they are
   convicted of being. R. Which of them, therefore, do you think true? A.
   Do not, I beg, think it necessary even to put that question to me. For
   who is so dull, as not to see that those figures which are taught in
   Geometry, dwell in Truth itself, or even Truth in these; but that those
   embodied figures, inasmuch as, they seem, so to speak, to tend towards
   these, have I know not what imitation of truth, and are therefore
   false? For now that whole matter which thou wert laboring to show, I
   understand.

   33. R. What need is there any longer than that we should inquire
   concerning the science of disputation? For whether the figures of
   Geometry are in the Truth, or the Truth is in them, that they are
   contained in our soul, that, is, in our intelligence, no one calls in
   question, and through this fact Truth also is compelled to be in our
   mind. But if every science whatever is so in the mind, as in the
   subject inseparably, and if Truth is not able to perish; why, I ask, do
   we doubt concerning the perpetual life of the mind through I know not
   what familiarity with death? Or have that line or squareness or
   roundness other things which they imitate that they may be true? A. In
   no way can I believe that, unless perchance a line be something else
   than length without breadth, and a circle something else than a
   circumscribed line everywhere verging equally to the centre. Why then
   do we hesitate? Or is not Truth where these things are? A. God avert
   such madness. R. Or is not the science in the mind? A. Who would say
   that? R. But is it possible, the subject perishing, that that which is
   in the subject should perdure? A. When could I imagine such a thing? R.
   It remains to suppose that Truth may fail. A. Whence could this be
   brought to pass? R. Therefore the soul is immortal: now at last yield
   to thine own arguments, believe the Truth; she cries out that she
   dwelleth in thee, and is immortal, and that her seat cannot be
   withdrawn from her by any possible death of the body. Turn away from
   thy shadow, return into thyself; of no meaning is the destruction thou
   fearest, except that thou hast forgotten that thou canst not be
   destroyed. A. I hear, I come to a better mind, I begin to recollect
   myself. But I beg thou wouldst expedite those things which remain; how,
   in an undisciplined mind, for a mortal one we cannot call it, Science
   and Truth are to be understood to be. R. That question requires another
   volume, if thou wouldst have it treated thoroughly: moreover also I see
   occasion for thee to review those things, which, after our best power,
   have been already examined; because if no one of those things which
   have been admitted is doubtful, I think that we have accomplished much,
   and with no small security may proceed to push our inquiries farther.

   34. A. It is as thou sayest, and I willingly yield compliance with
   thine injunctions. But this at least I would entreat, before thou
   decreest a term to the volume, that thou wouldst summarily explain what
   the distinction is between the true figure, which is contained in the
   intelligence, and that which thought frames to itself, which in Greek
   is termed either Phantasia or Phantasma. R. Thou seekest that which no
   one except one of purest sight is able to see, and to the vision of
   which thing thou art but poorly trained; nor have we now in these wide
   circuits anything else in view than to exercise thee, that thou mayest
   be competent to see: yet how it is possible to be taught that the
   difference is very great, perhaps I can, with a little pains, make
   clear. For suppose thou hadst forgotten something, and that others were
   wishing that thou shouldst recall it to memory. They therefore say: Is
   it this, or that? bringing forward things diverse from it as if similar
   to it. But thou neither seest that which thou desirest to recollect,
   and yet seest that it is not this which is suggested. Seems this to
   thee, when it happens, by any means equivalent to total forgetfulness?
   For this very power of distinguishing, whereby the false suggestions
   made to time are repelled, is a certain part of recollection. A. So it
   seems. R. Such therefore do not yet see the truth yet they cannot be
   misled and deceived; and what they seek, they sufficiently know. But if
   any one should say that thou didst laugh a few days after thou wast
   born, thou wouldst not venture to say it was false: and if he were an
   authority worthy of credit, thou art ready, not, indeed, to remember,
   but to believe; for to thee that whole time is buried in most authentic
   oblivion. Or thinkest thou otherwise? A. I thoroughly agree with this.
   R. This oblivion therefore differs exceedingly from that, but that
   stands midway. For there is another nearer and more closely neighboring
   to the recollection and rekindled vision of truth: the like of which is
   when we see something, and recognize for certain that we have seen it
   at some time, and affirm that we know it; but where, or when, or how,
   or with whom it came into our knowledge, we have enough to do to search
   our memory for an answer. As if this happens in regard to a man, we
   also inquire where we have known him: which when he has brought to
   mind, suddenly the whole thing flashes upon the memory like a light,
   and we have no more trouble to recollect. Is this sort of forgetfulness
   unknown to thee, or obscure? A. What plainer than this or what is
   happening to me more frequently?

   35. R. Such are those who are well instructed in the liberal arts;
   since they by learning disinter them, buried in oblivion, doubtless,
   within themselves, and, in a manner, dig them out afresh: nor yet are
   they content, nor refrain themselves until the whole aspect of Truth,
   of which, in those arts, a certain effulgence already gleams forth upon
   them, is by them most widely and most clearly beheld. But from this
   certain false colors and forms pour themselves as it were upon the
   mirror of thought, and mislead inquirers often, and deceive those who
   think that to be the whole which they know or which they inquire. Those
   imaginations themselves are to be avoided with great carefulness; which
   are detected as fallacious, by their varying with the varied mirror of
   thought, whereas that face of Truth abides one and immutable. For then
   thought portrays to itself, for instance, a square of this or that or
   the other magnitude, and, as it were, brings it before the eyes; but
   the inner mind which wishes to see the truth, applies itself rather to
   that general conception, if it can, according to which it judges all
   these to be squares. A. What if some one should say to us that the mind
   judges according to what it is accustomed to see with the eyes? R. Why
   then does it judge, that is, if it is well trained, that a true sphere
   of any conceivable size is touched by a true plane at a point? How has
   eye ever seen, or how can eye ever see such a thing, when anything of
   this kind cannot be bodied forth in the pure imagination of thought? Or
   do we not prove this, when we describe even the smallest imaginary
   circle in our mind, and from it draw lines to the centre? For when we
   have drawn two, between which there is scarce room for a needle's
   point, we are no longer able, even in imagination, to draw others
   between, so that they shall arrive at the centre without any
   commixture; whereas reason exclaims that innumerable lines can be
   drawn, without being able to touch each other except in the centre, so
   that in every interval between them even a circle could be described.
   Since that Phantasy cannot accomplish this, and is more deficient than
   the eyes themselves, since it is through them that it is inflicted on
   the mind, it is manifest that it differs much from Truth, and that
   that, when this is seen, is not seen.

   36. These points will be treated with more pains and greater subtilty,
   when we shall have begun to discuss the faculty of intelligence, which
   part of our theme is proposed by us, as something which is to be
   developed and discussed by us, when anything gives anxiety concerning
   the life of the soul. For I believe thee to stand in no slight fear
   lest the death of man, even if it do not slay the soul, should
   nevertheless induce oblivion of all things, and of Truth itself, if any
   shall have been discovered. A. It cannot be expressed how much this
   evil is to be feared. For of what sort will be that eternal life, or
   what death is not to be preferred to it, if the soul so lives, as we
   see it live in a child just born? to say nothing of that life which is
   lived in the womb; for I do not think it to be none. R. Be of good
   courage; God will be present, as we now feel, to us who seek, who
   promises a certain most blessed body after this, and an utter plenitude
   of Truth without any falsehood. A. May it be as we hope.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    Indexes
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture References

   Genesis

   [1]1   [2]1:1   [3]1:1   [4]1:1   [5]1:3   [6]1:3   [7]1:4-5   [8]1:6
   [9]1:7   [10]1:26   [11]2:17   [12]2:22   [13]2:23   [14]2:24
   [15]2:24   [16]3:1   [17]3:1-6   [18]3:5   [19]3:6   [20]3:7
   [21]3:9   [22]3:20   [23]6:16   [24]8:6   [25]8:8-11   [26]8:9
   [27]11:1-9   [28]11:27   [29]13:8   [30]14:14   [31]16:4-9   [32]16:9
   [33]17:10   [34]19:24   [35]21:9-10   [36]21:9-12   [37]21:10
   [38]22:18   [39]22:18   [40]22:18   [41]22:18   [42]24:2-4
   [43]25:34   [44]28:2   [45]28:5   [46]28:12-18   [47]29:12-15
   [48]37:28

   Exodus

   [49]1:14   [50]3:6   [51]3:6   [52]3:6   [53]3:13-15   [54]3:14
   [55]3:14   [56]3:14   [57]3:14   [58]3:14   [59]3:15   [60]3:15
   [61]6:1   [62]7   [63]7:12   [64]8   [65]8   [66]12:11   [67]12:13
   [68]12:22-23   [69]12:23   [70]12:23   [71]12:27   [72]13:3
   [73]14:21-29   [74]14:21-31   [75]14:29   [76]16   [77]17:6
   [78]20:3-17   [79]20:8   [80]20:10   [81]20:12-17   [82]20:17
   [83]30:7   [84]31:18   [85]32:1-4   [86]33:11   [87]33:13   [88]33:13
   [89]33:20

   Leviticus

   [90]19:18   [91]23:8   [92]26:1-13

   Numbers

   [93]11:32   [94]12:7   [95]20:11   [96]21:6-9

   Deuteronomy

   [97]5:6   [98]9:10   [99]13:3   [100]13:5   [101]18:18   [102]19:15
   [103]19:15   [104]34:6

   Joshua

   [105]1:1   [106]3   [107]10:12-14

   Judges

   [108]15:19

   1 Samuel

   [109]19   [110]19

   1 Kings

   [111]17:4-9   [112]17:21-22

   2 Kings

   [113]2:9   [114]2:11   [115]2:11   [116]4:35   [117]13:21   [118]24

   Job

   [119]1:2   [120]1:11-12   [121]2:10   [122]7:1   [123]7:1   [124]9:24
   [125]14:1   [126]14:4-5   [127]25:6

   Psalms

   [128]1   [129]1:3   [130]2:6   [131]2:6-8   [132]2:7   [133]2:7
   [134]2:7-8   [135]2:8   [136]2:8   [137]3:3   [138]3:5   [139]3:9
   [140]4:1   [141]4:6   [142]5   [143]5:4   [144]5:5   [145]6:4
   [146]6:6   [147]7:8   [148]8:2   [149]9:7   [150]10:2   [151]10:3
   [152]10:3   [153]10:14   [154]11:3   [155]11:5   [156]11:5
   [157]13:3   [158]15:5   [159]16:2   [160]16:2   [161]17:4
   [162]17:15   [163]18:1   [164]18:28   [165]18:44   [166]19:2
   [167]19:3-4   [168]19:4   [169]19:4-5   [170]19:5   [171]19:5
   [172]19:7   [173]19:9   [174]19:9   [175]19:9   [176]19:9   [177]22:6
   [178]22:16   [179]22:16-17   [180]22:16-17   [181]22:17-29
   [182]22:20   [183]22:27   [184]24   [185]25:1   [186]25:8
   [187]25:10   [188]25:18   [189]26   [190]26:4   [191]27:11
   [192]27:12   [193]30:11-12   [194]32:7   [195]32:9   [196]33:5
   [197]33:9   [198]34:2   [199]34:2   [200]34:5   [201]34:5
   [202]34:16   [203]34:18   [204]34:18   [205]35:10   [206]35:12
   [207]35:13   [208]35:13   [209]35:13   [210]35:18   [211]35:20
   [212]35:27   [213]36:6   [214]36:6   [215]36:7   [216]36:7-10
   [217]36:8   [218]36:8-13   [219]36:9   [220]36:9-10   [221]37
   [222]37:2   [223]37:4   [224]38:10   [225]40:5   [226]40:14
   [227]40:14   [228]41:1   [229]41:4-5   [230]41:11   [231]42
   [232]42:6   [233]42:8   [234]43:1   [235]43:1   [236]43:1   [237]43:1
   [238]45:2   [239]45:2   [240]45:3-4   [241]45:3-5   [242]45:7
   [243]45:8   [244]46:8   [245]46:10   [246]47:3-8   [247]49:3
   [248]50   [249]50   [250]50:3   [251]50:3   [252]50:3   [253]50:3
   [254]51:3   [255]51:3   [256]51:7   [257]51:7   [258]51:8   [259]51:8
   [260]51:9   [261]51:9   [262]51:10   [263]51:11   [264]53:23
   [265]56:10   [266]56:11   [267]57:4   [268]57:4   [269]57:7   [270]59
   [271]59:10   [272]62   [273]65   [274]65:4   [275]68:4   [276]68:6
   [277]68:6   [278]68:20   [279]68:21   [280]69:4   [281]69:21
   [282]69:21   [283]69:22   [284]69:22   [285]69:32   [286]72:3
   [287]72:18   [288]73:1-2   [289]73:1-3   [290]73:9   [291]73:27-28
   [292]73:28   [293]73:28   [294]74:21   [295]75:2   [296]76:1
   [297]76:1   [298]76:2   [299]76:2   [300]77:9   [301]78:24
   [302]78:25   [303]80:7   [304]82:6   [305]82:6   [306]82:6
   [307]82:6   [308]82:8   [309]84:4   [310]84:4   [311]84:6   [312]84:7
   [313]84:10   [314]85:11   [315]85:11   [316]85:12   [317]86:11
   [318]86:11   [319]86:15   [320]88:4-5   [321]89:15-17   [322]90:4
   [323]94:8-9   [324]94:11   [325]94:11   [326]94:14   [327]97:3
   [328]101:1   [329]101:1   [330]101:1-2   [331]102:13-14   [332]102:27
   [333]102:27   [334]103:5   [335]103:5   [336]103:18   [337]104:23
   [338]104:24   [339]104:24   [340]105:4   [341]106   [342]106
   [343]108:5   [344]108:5   [345]110:1   [346]110:3   [347]110:3
   [348]110:3   [349]112:1-2   [350]113:1   [351]113:1   [352]113:3
   [353]113:3   [354]115:8   [355]116:10   [356]116:11   [357]116:11
   [358]116:12   [359]116:12-13   [360]116:15   [361]116:16
   [362]116:16   [363]118   [364]118:15   [365]118:22   [366]118:25-26
   [367]119:73   [368]119:85   [369]119:85   [370]119:96   [371]119:96
   [372]119:165   [373]119:165   [374]121:1-2   [375]121:4   [376]121:6
   [377]123:1   [378]126:5   [379]127:1   [380]127:1   [381]130
   [382]130:1   [383]131:17-18   [384]132:6   [385]132:17   [386]132:17
   [387]132:17   [388]132:17-18   [389]138:6   [390]139:7-8
   [391]139:7-8   [392]139:8   [393]142:4   [394]142:4   [395]147:5
   [396]147:7   [397]148   [398]148   [399]148:5

   Proverbs

   [400]1:7   [401]1:26   [402]5:16-17   [403]5:22   [404]9:13-17
   [405]9:18   [406]9:18   [407]12:28   [408]15:13   [409]16:22
   [410]20:8-9   [411]23:1   [412]23:1-2   [413]23:1-2   [414]23:1-2
   [415]23:2   [416]23:3-5   [417]27:2   [418]27:2   [419]31:26

   Ecclesiastes

   [420]7:16   [421]7:20   [422]10:1

   Song of Solomon

   [423]1:3   [424]1:3   [425]1:4   [426]1:4   [427]2:6   [428]4:8
   [429]5:2-3   [430]5:3   [431]6:8   [432]6:8   [433]7:6   [434]8:5
   [435]8:6

   Isaiah

   [436]1:3   [437]2:2   [438]2:3   [439]5:4   [440]5:18   [441]6:10
   [442]7:9   [443]7:9   [444]7:9   [445]7:9   [446]7:9   [447]8:8
   [448]9:2   [449]9:6   [450]10:23   [451]11:2-3   [452]14:14
   [453]14:27   [454]26:3   [455]26:10   [456]28:16   [457]28:22
   [458]35:4   [459]40:1-8   [460]40:3   [461]40:3   [462]40:3
   [463]40:6   [464]42:14   [465]42:14   [466]45:11   [467]45:11
   [468]45:11   [469]45:11   [470]46:8   [471]49:8   [472]52:3
   [473]53:1   [474]53:2   [475]53:5-8   [476]53:7   [477]53:7
   [478]53:7   [479]53:7   [480]53:7   [481]53:7   [482]53:7   [483]53:7
   [484]53:12   [485]53:12   [486]58:7-8   [487]59:1-2   [488]61:10
   [489]63:16   [490]64:4   [491]64:4

   Jeremiah

   [492]2:21   [493]17:5   [494]23:24   [495]23:24

   Ezekiel

   [496]1:1   [497]15:5   [498]16:3   [499]18:21   [500]34:4   [501]36:20

   Daniel

   [502]2:34   [503]2:34-35   [504]2:34-35   [505]2:35   [506]3
   [507]3:16-18   [508]3:23-24   [509]3:23-27   [510]3:50   [511]3:88
   [512]6:22   [513]6:22   [514]13:36-62

   Habakkuk

   [515]2:4   [516]2:4   [517]2:4   [518]2:14

   Zechariah

   [519]12:10   [520]12:13

   Malachi

   [521]1:3   [522]1:10-11   [523]3:1

   Matthew

   [524]1:17   [525]2:2   [526]2:2   [527]2:3   [528]2:6   [529]2:16
   [530]2:23   [531]3:7-9   [532]3:9   [533]3:10   [534]3:14   [535]3:14
   [536]3:14   [537]3:14-15   [538]3:15   [539]3:16   [540]3:16
   [541]3:16   [542]3:16   [543]3:16   [544]4:1-10   [545]4:1-10
   [546]4:7   [547]4:19   [548]4:19   [549]4:19   [550]5:6   [551]5:6
   [552]5:6   [553]5:6   [554]5:8   [555]5:8   [556]5:8   [557]5:8
   [558]5:8   [559]5:8   [560]5:8   [561]5:8   [562]5:8   [563]5:8
   [564]5:8   [565]5:8   [566]5:10   [567]5:14   [568]5:14
   [569]5:14-16   [570]5:14-16   [571]5:15   [572]5:16   [573]5:16
   [574]5:16   [575]5:17   [576]5:17-20   [577]5:19   [578]5:25
   [579]5:39   [580]5:41   [581]5:44   [582]5:44-46   [583]5:45
   [584]5:46   [585]5:48   [586]6:1   [587]6:1-3   [588]6:3   [589]6:5
   [590]6:9   [591]6:9   [592]6:9   [593]6:9-13   [594]6:10   [595]6:10
   [596]6:11   [597]6:12   [598]6:12   [599]6:12   [600]6:12   [601]6:12
   [602]6:12   [603]6:12   [604]6:12   [605]6:12-13   [606]6:13
   [607]6:13   [608]6:14-15   [609]6:33   [610]6:34   [611]7:7
   [612]7:16   [613]7:23   [614]7:24   [615]7:24-25   [616]7:24-27
   [617]8   [618]8:5-12   [619]8:12   [620]8:17   [621]8:21-22
   [622]8:22   [623]8:22   [624]8:24-26   [625]8:29   [626]8:29
   [627]9:9   [628]9:12   [629]9:13   [630]9:13   [631]9:15
   [632]9:20-22   [633]10:16   [634]10:17   [635]10:20   [636]10:20
   [637]10:22   [638]10:22   [639]10:23   [640]10:26   [641]10:27
   [642]10:27   [643]10:28   [644]10:28   [645]10:28   [646]10:33
   [647]10:40   [648]10:40   [649]10:41-42   [650]11:7-9   [651]11:11
   [652]11:11   [653]11:11   [654]11:11   [655]11:11   [656]11:11-13
   [657]11:14   [658]11:27   [659]11:27   [660]11:27   [661]11:28
   [662]11:28-29   [663]11:29   [664]11:30   [665]11:30   [666]12:7
   [667]12:16   [668]12:24-33   [669]12:30   [670]12:34   [671]12:46-50
   [672]13:3-25   [673]13:24   [674]13:38   [675]13:38-41
   [676]13:38-43   [677]13:39   [678]13:43   [679]13:46   [680]13:47
   [681]13:48-49   [682]13:57   [683]14:15-21   [684]14:25   [685]14:25
   [686]14:25-29   [687]14:26   [688]14:36   [689]15:24   [690]15:24
   [691]15:24   [692]15:32-38   [693]16:13-16   [694]16:13-18
   [695]16:15-16   [696]16:16   [697]16:16-17   [698]16:16-19
   [699]16:16-23   [700]16:19   [701]16:19   [702]16:19   [703]16:19
   [704]16:19   [705]16:21-22   [706]16:23   [707]16:23   [708]16:27
   [709]17:3   [710]17:10-13   [711]17:20   [712]18:10   [713]18:16
   [714]18:18   [715]19:6   [716]19:6   [717]19:12   [718]19:17
   [719]19:21-22   [720]19:27   [721]19:27   [722]19:28   [723]19:29
   [724]20:9   [725]20:10   [726]20:19   [727]20:22   [728]20:28
   [729]20:30-34   [730]21:1-16   [731]21:9   [732]21:23-27
   [733]21:23-27   [734]21:23-27   [735]21:25   [736]22:3   [737]22:13
   [738]22:13   [739]22:15-21   [740]22:21   [741]22:30   [742]22:31-32
   [743]22:32   [744]22:37-40   [745]22:37-40   [746]22:37-40
   [747]22:37-40   [748]22:40   [749]22:40   [750]22:42-45   [751]22:45
   [752]23:2-3   [753]23:2-3   [754]23:2-3   [755]23:3   [756]23:3
   [757]23:3   [758]23:8-9   [759]23:10   [760]23:27   [761]23:37
   [762]24:9   [763]24:12   [764]24:12   [765]24:13   [766]24:23
   [767]24:24   [768]24:31   [769]24:35   [770]25:21   [771]25:21
   [772]25:23   [773]25:25-30   [774]25:31   [775]25:31-40   [776]25:34
   [777]25:34   [778]25:34   [779]25:34   [780]25:34   [781]25:40
   [782]25:40   [783]25:41   [784]25:41   [785]25:41   [786]25:41
   [787]25:41   [788]25:46   [789]25:46   [790]25:46   [791]26:33-34
   [792]26:34   [793]26:34   [794]26:38   [795]26:38-39   [796]26:39
   [797]26:39   [798]26:41   [799]26:57   [800]26:63   [801]26:66
   [802]26:69-74   [803]26:69-74   [804]26:69-74   [805]27:4-5
   [806]27:14   [807]27:34   [808]27:35   [809]27:38   [810]27:39-40
   [811]27:45   [812]27:48   [813]27:51   [814]27:52-53   [815]27:54
   [816]28:1   [817]28:9   [818]28:19   [819]28:19   [820]28:20
   [821]28:20   [822]28:20   [823]28:20   [824]28:20   [825]28:20
   [826]28:20   [827]28:20   [828]28:20   [829]28:28

   Mark

   [830]1:10   [831]1:24   [832]1:24   [833]1:24   [834]1:32-34
   [835]4:12   [836]5:41-42   [837]6:56   [838]10:10   [839]10:33-34
   [840]11:1-11   [841]12:28-33   [842]13:9-13   [843]13:22-23
   [844]13:27   [845]14:61   [846]15:5   [847]15:24   [848]15:25
   [849]15:25   [850]15:27   [851]15:33   [852]15:36   [853]16:15

   Luke

   [854]1:8-9   [855]1:17   [856]1:34-35   [857]1:35-79   [858]1:41-45
   [859]1:41-45   [860]1:67-69   [861]1:67-79   [862]2:25-38
   [863]2:25-38   [864]2:25-38   [865]2:40   [866]2:51   [867]2:52
   [868]3:2   [869]3:21-22   [870]4:18-21   [871]4:24   [872]4:30
   [873]5:3-7   [874]6:13   [875]6:14   [876]6:19   [877]6:25
   [878]6:27   [879]6:46   [880]7:14   [881]7:14-15   [882]7:36-47
   [883]7:37-47   [884]8:2   [885]8:8   [886]8:8   [887]8:32   [888]8:45
   [889]8:46   [890]8:54   [891]9:12   [892]9:35   [893]9:62   [894]10:1
   [895]10:16   [896]10:17   [897]10:20   [898]10:20   [899]10:30-35
   [900]10:30-37   [901]10:40   [902]11:1-4   [903]11:27   [904]12:4
   [905]12:4-5   [906]13:21   [907]14:11   [908]15:4-5   [909]15:4-10
   [910]15:22   [911]15:31   [912]15:31   [913]15:32   [914]16:16
   [915]16:22-24   [916]16:24-28   [917]16:27-28   [918]17:3
   [919]17:17   [920]18:8   [921]18:34-43   [922]19:8   [923]19:10
   [924]19:10   [925]19:10   [926]19:12   [927]19:29-48   [928]20:2-8
   [929]20:18   [930]20:36   [931]20:36   [932]20:36   [933]20:37-38
   [934]21:12-17   [935]21:18   [936]22:3-4   [937]22:19-21   [938]22:32
   [939]22:33-34   [940]22:43   [941]22:51   [942]22:52   [943]22:55-60
   [944]23:1   [945]23:7-9   [946]23:33   [947]23:34   [948]23:34
   [949]23:34   [950]23:34   [951]23:34   [952]23:34   [953]23:34
   [954]23:34   [955]23:34   [956]23:34   [957]23:42   [958]23:43
   [959]23:43   [960]23:43   [961]23:43   [962]23:44   [963]24:13-21
   [964]24:13-28   [965]24:21   [966]24:39   [967]24:39   [968]24:44
   [969]24:44   [970]24:46   [971]24:46-47   [972]24:47   [973]24:47
   [974]24:49

   John

   [975]1:1   [976]1:1   [977]1:1   [978]1:1   [979]1:1   [980]1:1
   [981]1:1   [982]1:1   [983]1:1   [984]1:1   [985]1:1   [986]1:1
   [987]1:1   [988]1:1   [989]1:1   [990]1:1   [991]1:1   [992]1:1
   [993]1:2   [994]1:3   [995]1:3   [996]1:3   [997]1:3   [998]1:3
   [999]1:3   [1000]1:5   [1001]1:5   [1002]1:5   [1003]1:5   [1004]1:8
   [1005]1:9   [1006]1:9   [1007]1:9   [1008]1:9   [1009]1:9
   [1010]1:10   [1011]1:10   [1012]1:10   [1013]1:10   [1014]1:10
   [1015]1:12   [1016]1:12   [1017]1:12   [1018]1:14   [1019]1:14
   [1020]1:14   [1021]1:14   [1022]1:14   [1023]1:14   [1024]1:14
   [1025]1:14   [1026]1:14   [1027]1:14   [1028]1:14   [1029]1:14
   [1030]1:14   [1031]1:14   [1032]1:14   [1033]1:16   [1034]1:18
   [1035]1:19-36   [1036]1:20   [1037]1:23   [1038]1:26-27
   [1039]1:26-27   [1040]1:26-34   [1041]1:27   [1042]1:29   [1043]1:29
   [1044]1:30   [1045]1:32   [1046]1:33   [1047]1:33   [1048]1:33
   [1049]1:51   [1050]2:4   [1051]2:9   [1052]2:19   [1053]2:19
   [1054]2:21   [1055]2:23   [1056]3:1-2   [1057]3:5   [1058]3:13
   [1059]3:13   [1060]3:13   [1061]3:17   [1062]3:17   [1063]3:17
   [1064]3:17   [1065]3:18   [1066]3:26-36   [1067]3:29   [1068]3:29
   [1069]3:34   [1070]4:1-2   [1071]4:24   [1072]4:24   [1073]4:24
   [1074]4:24   [1075]4:34   [1076]4:39   [1077]4:44   [1078]5:17
   [1079]5:18   [1080]5:19   [1081]5:19   [1082]5:21   [1083]5:21
   [1084]5:22   [1085]5:22   [1086]5:22   [1087]5:26   [1088]5:26
   [1089]5:26   [1090]5:26   [1091]5:27   [1092]5:28-29   [1093]5:28-29
   [1094]5:30   [1095]5:33   [1096]5:35   [1097]5:35   [1098]5:35
   [1099]5:35   [1100]5:35   [1101]5:43   [1102]5:44   [1103]5:45
   [1104]5:46   [1105]5:46   [1106]6   [1107]6:29   [1108]6:39
   [1109]6:41   [1110]6:44   [1111]6:45   [1112]6:45   [1113]6:45
   [1114]6:51   [1115]6:54   [1116]6:54-59   [1117]6:54-69   [1118]6:70
   [1119]6:71   [1120]7:16   [1121]7:16   [1122]7:30   [1123]7:31
   [1124]7:37-39   [1125]7:39   [1126]7:39   [1127]7:39   [1128]8:15
   [1129]8:15   [1130]8:15   [1131]8:18   [1132]8:18   [1133]8:20
   [1134]8:24   [1135]8:25   [1136]8:25   [1137]8:28   [1138]8:28
   [1139]8:28   [1140]8:30   [1141]8:31   [1142]8:31-32   [1143]8:32-36
   [1144]8:34   [1145]8:34   [1146]8:34   [1147]8:35   [1148]8:35
   [1149]8:44   [1150]8:44   [1151]8:44   [1152]8:44   [1153]8:44
   [1154]8:58   [1155]8:58   [1156]8:58   [1157]9:7   [1158]9:39
   [1159]9:39-41   [1160]10:7   [1161]10:11   [1162]10:16   [1163]10:16
   [1164]10:16   [1165]10:18   [1166]10:18   [1167]10:18   [1168]10:18
   [1169]10:18   [1170]10:18   [1171]10:18   [1172]10:18   [1173]10:28
   [1174]10:30   [1175]10:30   [1176]10:30   [1177]10:30   [1178]10:30
   [1179]10:30   [1180]10:30   [1181]10:30   [1182]10:30   [1183]10:30
   [1184]10:30   [1185]10:30   [1186]10:30   [1187]10:30   [1188]10:30
   [1189]10:30   [1190]10:34   [1191]10:38   [1192]10:39-40
   [1193]10:42   [1194]11:25   [1195]11:33   [1196]11:33
   [1197]11:41-44   [1198]11:43   [1199]11:48   [1200]11:50
   [1201]12:2-6   [1202]12:19   [1203]12:23   [1204]12:27   [1205]12:29
   [1206]12:31   [1207]12:31   [1208]12:42-43   [1209]12:43
   [1210]12:47   [1211]13:1   [1212]13:5   [1213]13:7-8   [1214]13:8
   [1215]13:10   [1216]13:10   [1217]13:11   [1218]13:16   [1219]13:16
   [1220]13:18   [1221]13:23   [1222]13:23   [1223]13:23   [1224]13:27
   [1225]13:29   [1226]13:33   [1227]13:33   [1228]13:34   [1229]13:34
   [1230]13:34   [1231]13:34   [1232]13:34   [1233]13:34   [1234]13:34
   [1235]13:34   [1236]13:34   [1237]13:34   [1238]13:34   [1239]13:34
   [1240]13:36   [1241]13:36   [1242]13:36   [1243]13:36-38
   [1244]13:37   [1245]13:37   [1246]13:37   [1247]13:38   [1248]13:38
   [1249]14:1   [1250]14:6   [1251]14:6   [1252]14:6   [1253]14:6
   [1254]14:6   [1255]14:6   [1256]14:6   [1257]14:6   [1258]14:6
   [1259]14:6   [1260]14:8   [1261]14:8   [1262]14:8-9   [1263]14:9
   [1264]14:9   [1265]14:9   [1266]14:10   [1267]14:10   [1268]14:10
   [1269]14:10   [1270]14:12   [1271]14:17   [1272]14:17   [1273]14:19
   [1274]14:21   [1275]14:21   [1276]14:21   [1277]14:21   [1278]14:21
   [1279]14:23   [1280]14:23   [1281]14:25-26   [1282]14:28
   [1283]14:28   [1284]14:28   [1285]14:28   [1286]14:30
   [1287]14:30-31   [1288]14:30-31   [1289]15:4   [1290]15:5
   [1291]15:5   [1292]15:5   [1293]15:5   [1294]15:5   [1295]15:5
   [1296]15:5   [1297]15:13   [1298]15:13   [1299]15:13   [1300]15:13
   [1301]15:13   [1302]15:13   [1303]15:15   [1304]15:15   [1305]15:15
   [1306]15:15   [1307]15:19   [1308]15:19   [1309]15:19   [1310]15:19
   [1311]15:19   [1312]15:19   [1313]15:20   [1314]15:20   [1315]15:22
   [1316]15:22   [1317]15:26   [1318]15:26   [1319]15:27   [1320]16:4
   [1321]16:8-11   [1322]16:10   [1323]16:10   [1324]16:12   [1325]16:12
   [1326]16:12   [1327]16:13   [1328]16:15   [1329]16:15   [1330]16:23
   [1331]16:25   [1332]16:25   [1333]16:25-28   [1334]16:31-32
   [1335]16:32   [1336]17:3   [1337]17:3   [1338]17:3   [1339]17:3
   [1340]17:3   [1341]17:4   [1342]17:4   [1343]17:5   [1344]17:10
   [1345]17:11   [1346]17:12   [1347]17:15   [1348]17:16   [1349]17:24
   [1350]17:24   [1351]17:24   [1352]17:25   [1353]18:4-6   [1354]18:4-6
   [1355]18:6   [1356]18:6   [1357]18:6   [1358]18:31   [1359]19:6
   [1360]19:6   [1361]19:9   [1362]19:14   [1363]19:23   [1364]19:25
   [1365]19:26   [1366]19:27   [1367]19:28-30   [1368]19:28-33
   [1369]19:30   [1370]19:34   [1371]19:37   [1372]19:37   [1373]19:37
   [1374]19:38   [1375]20:15   [1376]20:17   [1377]20:17   [1378]20:19
   [1379]20:22   [1380]20:22   [1381]20:22   [1382]20:24-29
   [1383]20:25-29   [1384]20:27   [1385]20:27   [1386]20:27-28
   [1387]20:29   [1388]20:29   [1389]20:29   [1390]20:29   [1391]20:30
   [1392]21:15   [1393]21:15-17   [1394]21:15-19   [1395]21:15-19
   [1396]21:18-19   [1397]21:18-19   [1398]21:20-24

   Acts

   [1399]1:3   [1400]1:3   [1401]1:3   [1402]1:3-11   [1403]1:4
   [1404]1:6   [1405]1:6-8   [1406]1:6-8   [1407]1:7-8   [1408]1:8
   [1409]1:9   [1410]1:9   [1411]1:9-11   [1412]1:10   [1413]1:11
   [1414]1:11   [1415]1:11   [1416]1:15   [1417]1:15   [1418]1:26
   [1419]1:26   [1420]1:26   [1421]2   [1422]2   [1423]2   [1424]2
   [1425]2:1   [1426]2:1   [1427]2:1-12   [1428]2:2   [1429]2:2-4
   [1430]2:3   [1431]2:4   [1432]2:4   [1433]2:4   [1434]2:4
   [1435]2:4-6   [1436]2:6   [1437]2:31   [1438]2:37   [1439]2:41
   [1440]2:41   [1441]3:2-16   [1442]3:6-8   [1443]4:4   [1444]4:32
   [1445]4:32   [1446]4:32   [1447]4:32-35   [1448]5:15   [1449]5:15
   [1450]6:1-4   [1451]7:37   [1452]7:51-59   [1453]7:56   [1454]7:59
   [1455]7:59   [1456]7:59   [1457]8:5-23   [1458]8:13   [1459]9
   [1460]9:4   [1461]9:4   [1462]9:4   [1463]9:4   [1464]9:4   [1465]9:4
   [1466]10:20   [1467]11:26   [1468]11:26   [1469]12:2   [1470]13:7
   [1471]13:12   [1472]15:9   [1473]15:9   [1474]16:25   [1475]17:31
   [1476]19:3-5   [1477]19:19

   Romans

   [1478]1:1-4   [1479]1:1-4   [1480]1:3   [1481]1:3   [1482]1:3
   [1483]1:17   [1484]1:17   [1485]1:17   [1486]1:17   [1487]1:17
   [1488]1:17   [1489]1:17   [1490]1:17   [1491]1:19-22   [1492]1:20
   [1493]1:20-22   [1494]1:21   [1495]1:24   [1496]1:25   [1497]2:4-6
   [1498]2:9   [1499]2:12   [1500]2:12   [1501]2:21   [1502]2:24
   [1503]2:29   [1504]3:3   [1505]3:4   [1506]3:4   [1507]3:21
   [1508]3:23   [1509]3:28   [1510]4:2   [1511]4:5   [1512]4:5
   [1513]4:5   [1514]4:5   [1515]4:5   [1516]4:5   [1517]4:17
   [1518]4:25   [1519]4:25   [1520]4:25   [1521]4:25   [1522]5:5
   [1523]5:5   [1524]5:5   [1525]5:5   [1526]5:5   [1527]5:5   [1528]5:5
   [1529]5:5   [1530]5:5   [1531]5:5   [1532]5:5   [1533]5:5   [1534]5:5
   [1535]5:5   [1536]5:5   [1537]5:5   [1538]5:5   [1539]5:5   [1540]5:6
   [1541]5:8-9   [1542]5:8-9   [1543]5:12   [1544]5:12   [1545]5:14
   [1546]5:19   [1547]5:19   [1548]5:20   [1549]6:9   [1550]6:9
   [1551]6:9   [1552]6:9   [1553]6:9   [1554]6:12-13   [1555]6:14
   [1556]6:20   [1557]6:22   [1558]7:6   [1559]7:6   [1560]7:12
   [1561]7:13   [1562]7:13   [1563]7:15   [1564]7:18   [1565]7:22
   [1566]7:22-23   [1567]7:23-25   [1568]7:23-25   [1569]7:29-33
   [1570]8:3   [1571]8:3   [1572]8:3   [1573]8:3   [1574]8:7   [1575]8:9
   [1576]8:9   [1577]8:9   [1578]8:10   [1579]8:11   [1580]8:15
   [1581]8:23   [1582]8:24-25   [1583]8:24-25   [1584]8:24-25
   [1585]8:26   [1586]8:26-27   [1587]8:28   [1588]8:28-30
   [1589]8:29-30   [1590]8:30   [1591]8:31-32   [1592]8:32   [1593]8:32
   [1594]8:32   [1595]8:34   [1596]8:34   [1597]8:34   [1598]8:34
   [1599]8:35   [1600]9:5   [1601]9:7-8   [1602]9:13   [1603]9:14
   [1604]9:21   [1605]9:23   [1606]10:2   [1607]10:2-3   [1608]10:2-3
   [1609]10:3   [1610]10:3   [1611]10:3   [1612]10:3   [1613]10:4
   [1614]10:4   [1615]10:4   [1616]10:4   [1617]10:8-9   [1618]10:10
   [1619]10:10   [1620]10:10   [1621]10:10   [1622]10:10   [1623]10:14
   [1624]10:16   [1625]11:2   [1626]11:5-6   [1627]11:5-6   [1628]11:7
   [1629]11:17   [1630]11:17   [1631]11:17   [1632]11:17   [1633]11:20
   [1634]11:25   [1635]11:25   [1636]11:33   [1637]11:33   [1638]12:2
   [1639]12:3   [1640]12:3   [1641]12:12   [1642]12:12   [1643]13:1
   [1644]13:1   [1645]13:4   [1646]13:8   [1647]13:8   [1648]13:10
   [1649]13:10   [1650]13:10   [1651]13:10   [1652]13:12-13
   [1653]14:20   [1654]14:23   [1655]15:8

   1 Corinthians

   [1656]1:12   [1657]1:12   [1658]1:12-13   [1659]1:13   [1660]1:13
   [1661]1:13   [1662]1:16   [1663]1:20   [1664]1:20-28   [1665]1:23-24
   [1666]1:24   [1667]1:24   [1668]1:24   [1669]1:24   [1670]1:25
   [1671]1:30   [1672]1:30-31   [1673]1:30-31   [1674]1:31   [1675]1:31
   [1676]1:31   [1677]1:31   [1678]2:2   [1679]2:6   [1680]2:6
   [1681]2:6   [1682]2:8   [1683]2:9   [1684]2:9   [1685]2:9   [1686]2:9
   [1687]2:9   [1688]2:9   [1689]2:9   [1690]2:11   [1691]2:12
   [1692]2:12   [1693]2:13   [1694]2:14   [1695]2:14   [1696]2:14
   [1697]2:16-17   [1698]3:1   [1699]3:1-2   [1700]3:1-2   [1701]3:1-2
   [1702]3:4   [1703]3:5-7   [1704]3:6   [1705]3:6-7   [1706]3:6-7
   [1707]3:6-7   [1708]3:6-7   [1709]3:7   [1710]3:7   [1711]3:7
   [1712]3:11   [1713]3:17   [1714]3:17   [1715]3:23   [1716]4:3
   [1717]4:5   [1718]4:5   [1719]4:5   [1720]4:7   [1721]4:7   [1722]4:7
   [1723]4:7   [1724]4:15   [1725]5:7   [1726]5:7   [1727]5:7
   [1728]6:3   [1729]6:17   [1730]7:7   [1731]7:14-15   [1732]7:40
   [1733]8:1   [1734]8:1   [1735]8:4   [1736]9:7   [1737]9:9-10
   [1738]9:11-15   [1739]9:27   [1740]10:1   [1741]10:1   [1742]10:1-4
   [1743]10:1-4   [1744]10:4   [1745]10:4   [1746]10:4   [1747]10:4
   [1748]10:4   [1749]10:11   [1750]10:13   [1751]10:17   [1752]11:3
   [1753]11:3   [1754]11:27   [1755]11:29   [1756]11:29   [1757]11:29
   [1758]11:29   [1759]11:29   [1760]11:29   [1761]11:30   [1762]11:32
   [1763]11:32   [1764]12:3   [1765]12:4   [1766]12:7-9   [1767]12:8-30
   [1768]12:11   [1769]12:25-26   [1770]12:26   [1771]12:26-27
   [1772]12:27   [1773]12:31   [1774]13:1   [1775]13:1-3   [1776]13:1-3
   [1777]13:1-3   [1778]13:1-3   [1779]13:2   [1780]13:2-3   [1781]13:3
   [1782]13:3   [1783]13:4   [1784]13:7   [1785]13:8   [1786]13:9
   [1787]13:10   [1788]13:12   [1789]13:12   [1790]13:12   [1791]13:12
   [1792]13:12   [1793]13:12   [1794]13:13   [1795]14:34
   [1796]14:37-38   [1797]15:6   [1798]15:8   [1799]15:9   [1800]15:10
   [1801]15:10   [1802]15:10   [1803]15:10   [1804]15:11   [1805]15:21
   [1806]15:21-22   [1807]15:21-22   [1808]15:21-22   [1809]15:23-24
   [1810]15:24   [1811]15:24   [1812]15:24   [1813]15:26   [1814]15:26
   [1815]15:28   [1816]15:28   [1817]15:28   [1818]15:41-42
   [1819]15:44-49   [1820]15:53   [1821]15:53-55   [1822]15:54
   [1823]15:54   [1824]15:57

   2 Corinthians

   [1825]1:12   [1826]1:20   [1827]1:22   [1828]1:22   [1829]2:14-16
   [1830]2:15   [1831]2:16   [1832]3:6   [1833]3:6   [1834]3:14-16
   [1835]3:15   [1836]3:15   [1837]4:13   [1838]4:16   [1839]5:1
   [1840]5:4   [1841]5:6   [1842]5:6-7   [1843]5:6-7   [1844]5:6-8
   [1845]5:7   [1846]5:7   [1847]5:10   [1848]5:13   [1849]5:15
   [1850]5:16   [1851]5:16   [1852]5:19   [1853]5:19   [1854]5:19
   [1855]5:20-21   [1856]6:2   [1857]6:8   [1858]6:10   [1859]6:11-12
   [1860]6:11-12   [1861]6:14   [1862]10:13   [1863]11:2-3   [1864]11:3
   [1865]11:29   [1866]11:33   [1867]12:2   [1868]12:2   [1869]12:2-4
   [1870]12:4   [1871]12:6   [1872]12:7-9   [1873]12:7-9   [1874]12:8
   [1875]12:8-9   [1876]12:15   [1877]12:15   [1878]13:3   [1879]13:3
   [1880]13:3   [1881]13:4

   Galatians

   [1882]1:1   [1883]1:9   [1884]1:12   [1885]1:22-24   [1886]2:2
   [1887]2:9   [1888]2:20   [1889]2:20   [1890]2:20   [1891]2:20
   [1892]2:20   [1893]3:16   [1894]3:16   [1895]3:16   [1896]3:16
   [1897]3:21-22   [1898]3:21-22   [1899]3:28   [1900]3:29   [1901]3:29
   [1902]3:29   [1903]3:29   [1904]4:4   [1905]4:4   [1906]4:4
   [1907]4:4   [1908]4:4-5   [1909]4:6   [1910]4:9   [1911]4:11
   [1912]4:22-30   [1913]4:22-31   [1914]4:24   [1915]4:30   [1916]5:6
   [1917]5:6   [1918]5:6   [1919]5:6   [1920]5:6   [1921]5:6   [1922]5:6
   [1923]5:6   [1924]5:6   [1925]5:13   [1926]5:17   [1927]5:17
   [1928]5:22   [1929]5:24   [1930]6:2   [1931]6:2   [1932]6:2
   [1933]6:3   [1934]6:3   [1935]6:4   [1936]6:9   [1937]6:14
   [1938]6:14   [1939]6:14   [1940]6:14   [1941]6:14

   Ephesians

   [1942]1:4   [1943]1:4   [1944]1:4   [1945]1:4   [1946]1:4   [1947]1:4
   [1948]1:4   [1949]1:14   [1950]1:18   [1951]2:3   [1952]2:3
   [1953]2:4-6   [1954]2:10   [1955]2:11-22   [1956]2:11-22   [1957]2:14
   [1958]2:14   [1959]2:14-20   [1960]3:8   [1961]3:17   [1962]3:17
   [1963]3:17   [1964]3:17   [1965]3:17-19   [1966]3:18   [1967]3:19
   [1968]3:31   [1969]4:2   [1970]4:2-3   [1971]4:4-6   [1972]4:7
   [1973]4:14   [1974]4:23   [1975]4:27   [1976]5:2   [1977]5:2
   [1978]5:2   [1979]5:8   [1980]5:8   [1981]5:8   [1982]5:8   [1983]5:8
   [1984]5:8   [1985]5:8   [1986]5:8   [1987]5:8   [1988]5:8
   [1989]5:12   [1990]5:13   [1991]5:14   [1992]5:18   [1993]5:25
   [1994]5:25-26   [1995]5:25-27   [1996]5:26-27   [1997]5:27
   [1998]5:28-29   [1999]6:12   [2000]6:12   [2001]6:12   [2002]6:12

   Philippians

   [2003]1:6   [2004]1:15-18   [2005]1:15-18   [2006]1:16   [2007]1:18
   [2008]1:18   [2009]1:21-24   [2010]1:23   [2011]1:23   [2012]1:23
   [2013]1:23-24   [2014]1:23-24   [2015]1:24   [2016]2:6   [2017]2:6
   [2018]2:6   [2019]2:6   [2020]2:6   [2021]2:6   [2022]2:6-7
   [2023]2:6-7   [2024]2:6-7   [2025]2:6-7   [2026]2:6-7   [2027]2:6-8
   [2028]2:6-8   [2029]2:7   [2030]2:7   [2031]2:7   [2032]2:7-11
   [2033]2:8   [2034]2:8   [2035]2:8   [2036]2:8   [2037]2:8   [2038]2:8
   [2039]2:8   [2040]2:12   [2041]2:19-21   [2042]2:21   [2043]2:21
   [2044]2:21   [2045]3:13   [2046]3:13-14   [2047]3:15   [2048]3:15-16
   [2049]3:15-16   [2050]3:15-16   [2051]3:20   [2052]3:20   [2053]3:21

   Colossians

   [2054]1:12-13   [2055]1:13   [2056]1:13   [2057]1:16   [2058]1:18
   [2059]1:24   [2060]2:3   [2061]2:5   [2062]2:5   [2063]2:9
   [2064]2:14   [2065]2:20   [2066]3:1-2   [2067]3:1-2   [2068]3:1-2
   [2069]3:1-4   [2070]3:3   [2071]3:3   [2072]3:3-4   [2073]3:5
   [2074]3:9-10   [2075]3:10   [2076]3:10   [2077]3:10   [2078]3:11
   [2079]3:13   [2080]3:14   [2081]4:3

   1 Thessalonians

   [2082]2:7   [2083]2:7   [2084]2:13   [2085]3:10   [2086]4:13
   [2087]4:15-16   [2088]5:8   [2089]5:8

   2 Thessalonians

   [2090]2:2-3   [2091]2:4   [2092]3:2   [2093]3:2   [2094]3:8

   1 Timothy

   [2095]1:5   [2096]1:5   [2097]1:7   [2098]1:9   [2099]1:13
   [2100]1:16   [2101]2:5   [2102]2:5   [2103]2:5   [2104]2:5
   [2105]2:5   [2106]2:5   [2107]2:5   [2108]2:5   [2109]2:5   [2110]2:5
   [2111]3:1   [2112]3:10   [2113]3:16   [2114]4:3   [2115]4:4
   [2116]5:6   [2117]5:8   [2118]5:10   [2119]5:15   [2120]5:16
   [2121]5:20   [2122]6:10   [2123]6:17-19   [2124]6:20-21

   2 Timothy

   [2125]1:8-9   [2126]2:8   [2127]2:13   [2128]2:16-17   [2129]2:17-18
   [2130]2:18   [2131]2:19   [2132]2:19   [2133]2:19   [2134]2:19
   [2135]2:19   [2136]2:19   [2137]3:1-5   [2138]3:5   [2139]3:7
   [2140]3:8   [2141]4:3-4   [2142]4:6-8   [2143]4:7   [2144]4:14-16

   Titus

   [2145]1:6   [2146]1:16   [2147]1:16   [2148]1:16   [2149]2:12-13
   [2150]3:5

   Hebrews

   [2151]2:10   [2152]4:15   [2153]5:12-14   [2154]6:1-2   [2155]10:23
   [2156]11:1   [2157]11:1   [2158]11:1   [2159]12:6   [2160]12:6
   [2161]13:1

   James

   [2162]1:13   [2163]1:19   [2164]2:19   [2165]2:19   [2166]2:19
   [2167]2:19   [2168]3:1-2   [2169]4:3   [2170]4:4   [2171]4:4
   [2172]4:6   [2173]5:16

   1 Peter

   [2174]1:8-9   [2175]2:6   [2176]2:6-8   [2177]2:17   [2178]2:21
   [2179]2:21   [2180]2:21   [2181]2:21   [2182]2:21   [2183]2:21-23
   [2184]3:9   [2185]3:13   [2186]3:21   [2187]4:8   [2188]4:8
   [2189]5:8   [2190]5:8   [2191]5:8

   2 Peter

   [2192]1:17-19   [2193]1:19   [2194]2:4

   1 John

   [2195]1   [2196]1:2   [2197]1:3   [2198]1:3   [2199]1:4   [2200]1:5
   [2201]1:5   [2202]1:5-10   [2203]1:5-2:28   [2204]1:6   [2205]1:7
   [2206]1:8   [2207]1:8   [2208]1:8   [2209]1:8   [2210]1:8   [2211]1:8
   [2212]1:9   [2213]1:9   [2214]1:9-10   [2215]2:1   [2216]2:1
   [2217]2:1-2   [2218]2:1-2   [2219]2:1-2   [2220]2:2   [2221]2:3-4
   [2222]2:5   [2223]2:5   [2224]2:5   [2225]2:6   [2226]2:6   [2227]2:7
   [2228]2:8   [2229]2:9   [2230]2:10   [2231]2:10   [2232]2:11
   [2233]2:11   [2234]2:11   [2235]2:12   [2236]2:12-28   [2237]2:13
   [2238]2:13   [2239]2:15   [2240]2:15   [2241]2:15   [2242]2:15
   [2243]2:15-17   [2244]2:16   [2245]2:16-17   [2246]2:18   [2247]2:18
   [2248]2:18   [2249]2:18   [2250]2:18   [2251]2:19   [2252]2:19
   [2253]2:19   [2254]2:21   [2255]2:22   [2256]2:22   [2257]2:22
   [2258]2:23   [2259]2:24-25   [2260]2:25-26   [2261]2:26-27
   [2262]2:27   [2263]2:28   [2264]2:29   [2265]2:29-3:22   [2266]3:1
   [2267]3:2   [2268]3:2   [2269]3:2   [2270]3:2   [2271]3:2   [2272]3:2
   [2273]3:2   [2274]3:2   [2275]3:2   [2276]3:2   [2277]3:2   [2278]3:3
   [2279]3:3   [2280]3:4   [2281]3:5   [2282]3:6   [2283]3:7   [2284]3:8
   [2285]3:8   [2286]3:9   [2287]3:9   [2288]3:9   [2289]3:10
   [2290]3:10   [2291]3:10-11   [2292]3:12   [2293]3:13   [2294]3:14
   [2295]3:15   [2296]3:15   [2297]3:15   [2298]3:16   [2299]3:16
   [2300]3:16   [2301]3:16   [2302]3:16   [2303]3:17   [2304]3:17
   [2305]3:18   [2306]3:18-20   [2307]3:19   [2308]3:21   [2309]3:21-22
   [2310]3:23   [2311]3:23   [2312]3:23-5:17   [2313]3:24
   [2314]3:27-28   [2315]4:1   [2316]4:2   [2317]4:2-3   [2318]4:3
   [2319]4:4   [2320]4:5   [2321]4:6   [2322]4:7   [2323]4:7
   [2324]4:7-8   [2325]4:8   [2326]4:8   [2327]4:9   [2328]4:9-10
   [2329]4:11   [2330]4:12   [2331]4:12   [2332]4:12   [2333]4:13
   [2334]4:13   [2335]4:14   [2336]4:15   [2337]4:16   [2338]4:16
   [2339]4:16   [2340]4:16   [2341]4:17   [2342]4:18   [2343]4:18
   [2344]4:18   [2345]4:18   [2346]4:18   [2347]4:18   [2348]4:18
   [2349]4:18   [2350]4:19   [2351]4:19   [2352]4:19   [2353]4:20
   [2354]4:20   [2355]4:20   [2356]4:20-21   [2357]4:20-21   [2358]5
   [2359]5:7-8   [2360]5:13   [2361]5:16   [2362]5:20   [2363]5:20
   [2364]8:24

   2 John

   [2365]1:7

   Revelation

   [2366]3:1   [2367]3:16   [2368]5:5   [2369]5:5   [2370]17:15
   [2371]17:15   [2372]22:8-9

   Tobit

   [2373]2:11   [2374]4

   Wisdom of Solomon

   [2375]1:1   [2376]1:2   [2377]1:11   [2378]2:1   [2379]6:16
   [2380]7:24   [2381]7:26   [2382]7:26   [2383]7:26   [2384]8:1
   [2385]9:15   [2386]9:15   [2387]9:15   [2388]9:15   [2389]9:15
   [2390]9:15   [2391]9:15   [2392]11:21   [2393]11:25

   2 Maccabees

   [2394]7   [2395]7

   Sirach

   [2396]1:28   [2397]2:12   [2398]3:21   [2399]3:22   [2400]5:8-9
   [2401]5:13   [2402]6:36-37   [2403]10:14-15   [2404]10:15
   [2405]18:7   [2406]18:30   [2407]38:24
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Scripture Commentary

   Song of Solomon

   [2408]5:2-3

   John

   [2409]1:1-5   [2410]1:6-14   [2411]1:15-18   [2412]1:19-33
   [2413]1:32-33   [2414]1:33   [2415]1:34-51   [2416]2:1-4
   [2417]2:1-11   [2418]2:12-21   [2419]2:23-25   [2420]3:1-5
   [2421]3:6-21   [2422]3:22-29   [2423]3:29-36   [2424]4:1-18
   [2425]4:1-42   [2426]4:43-54   [2427]5:19   [2428]5:19
   [2429]5:19-30   [2430]5:19-40   [2431]5:20-23   [2432]5:24-30
   [2433]6:1-14   [2434]6:15-44   [2435]6:41-59   [2436]6:60-72
   [2437]7:1-13   [2438]7:14-18   [2439]7:19-24   [2440]7:25-36
   [2441]7:37-39   [2442]7:40-53   [2443]8:1-11   [2444]8:12
   [2445]8:13-14   [2446]8:15-18   [2447]8:19-20   [2448]8:21-25
   [2449]8:26-27   [2450]8:28-32   [2451]8:31-36   [2452]8:37-47
   [2453]8:48-59   [2454]9   [2455]10:1-10   [2456]10:11-13
   [2457]10:14-21   [2458]10:22-42   [2459]11:1-54   [2460]11:55-57
   [2461]12   [2462]12:12-26   [2463]12:27-36   [2464]12:37-43
   [2465]12:44-50   [2466]13:1-5   [2467]13:6-10   [2468]13:6-10
   [2469]13:10   [2470]13:10-15   [2471]13:16-20   [2472]13:21
   [2473]13:21-26   [2474]13:26-31   [2475]13:31-32   [2476]13:33
   [2477]13:34-35   [2478]13:36-38   [2479]14:1-3   [2480]14:1-3
   [2481]14:4-6   [2482]14:7-10   [2483]14:10-14   [2484]14:10-14
   [2485]14:10-14   [2486]14:15-17   [2487]14:18-21   [2488]14:22-24
   [2489]14:25-27   [2490]14:27-28   [2491]14:29-31   [2492]15:1-3
   [2493]15:4-7   [2494]15:8-10   [2495]15:11-12   [2496]15:13
   [2497]15:14-15   [2498]15:15-16   [2499]15:17-19   [2500]15:20-21
   [2501]15:22-23   [2502]15:23   [2503]15:24-25   [2504]15:26-27
   [2505]16:1-4   [2506]16:4-7   [2507]16:8-11   [2508]16:12-13
   [2509]16:12-13   [2510]16:12-13   [2511]16:13   [2512]16:13-15
   [2513]16:16-23   [2514]16:23-28   [2515]16:29-33   [2516]17:1
   [2517]17:1-5   [2518]17:6-8   [2519]17:9-13   [2520]17:14-19
   [2521]17:20   [2522]17:21-23   [2523]17:24-26   [2524]18:1-12
   [2525]18:24-26   [2526]18:28-32   [2527]18:33-40   [2528]19:1-16
   [2529]19:17-22   [2530]19:23-24   [2531]19:24-30   [2532]19:31-42
   [2533]20:1-9   [2534]20:10-29   [2535]20:30-31   [2536]21:1-11
   [2537]21:12-19   [2538]21:19-25

   1 John

   [2539]1:1-2:11   [2540]2:12-17   [2541]2:18-27   [2542]2:27-3:8
   [2543]3:9-18   [2544]3:19-4:3   [2545]4:4-12   [2546]4:12-16
   [2547]4:17-21   [2548]5:1-3
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

     * anti: [2549]1
     * enkainia: [2550]1
     * epoiesan: [2551]1
     * erotesete: [2552]1
     * ho luei ton 'Iesoun apo tou Theou, ek tou Theou ouk ?sti: [2553]1
     * hos: [2554]1
     * ThEOS: [2555]1
     * Theos: [2556]1
     * a: [2557]1
     * ginoskete: [2558]1 [2559]2
     * deipnou genomenou: [2560]1
     * doxasei: [2561]1 [2562]2
     * theos: [2563]1
     * kai: [2564]1
     * katharizei: [2565]1
     * katharixei: [2566]1
     * kainos: [2567]1
     * kainophonias: [2568]1
     * kleron: [2569]1
     * klethomen kai esmen: [2570]1
     * logos: [2571]1 [2572]2
     * luei: [2573]1
     * me homologei, toutestin, ho luei: [2574]1
     * menei: [2575]1
     * menei: [2576]1
     * outos: [2577]1
     * pistis: [2578]1
     * paides: [2579]1 [2580]2
     * paidia: [2581]1 [2582]2
     * pantokrator: [2583]1 [2584]2
     * teknia: [2585]1
     * chrisma: [2586]1
     * pseudos: [2587]1
     * ?grapsa: [2588]1
     * ?stai: [2589]1
     * agape: [2590]1 [2591]2 [2592]3
     * agapomen: [2593]1
     * adoleschias: [2594]1
     * alethinon Theon: [2595]1
     * anatole: [2596]1
     * antikeimenos: [2597]1
     * apo tou Kaiapha,: [2598]1
     * arche: [2599]1 [2600]2
     * arches: [2601]1
     * aschezos: [2602]1
     * an oidamen: [2603]1
     * arti: [2604]1
     * archtos: [2605]1
     * ean me pisteusete, oude me sunete: [2606]1
     * ebastazen: [2607]1
     * ektoutou: [2608]1 [2609]2 [2610]3
     * en: [2611]1
     * en auto: [2612]1
     * en te aletheia pase: [2613]1
     * en to: [2614]1
     * en touto ginoskomen hoti egnokamen auton, ean: [2615]1
     * en truphais sou: [2616]1
     * endees psomou: [2617]1
     * entole: [2618]1
     * exarxate: [2619]1
     * exerithmesa: [2620]1 [2621]2
     * exerithmesan: [2622]1 [2623]2
     * estin: [2624]1
     * ephanerothe: [2625]1
     * hedunthes: [2626]1
     * hina: [2627]1
     * ho homologon ton huion kai ton patera ?chei: [2628]1
     * ho aitichristos: [2629]1
     * ho theos agape estin: [2630]1
     * ho theos: [2631]1
     * ho pater autou: [2632]1
     * ho poiesas: [2633]1
     * horisthentos: [2634]1 [2635]2
     * ho: [2636]1 [2637]2
     * ho ti: [2638]1
     * ho...meizon": [2639]1
     * hos: [2640]1 [2641]2 [2642]3 [2643]4 [2644]5
     * hos...meizon: [2645]1
     * hoti: [2646]1
     * humas: [2647]1
     * humin: [2648]1
     * eleutherosei: [2649]1
     * e meta tou patros: [2650]1
     * Aphes auten hina eis ten hemeran tou entaphiasmou mou terese auto:
       [2651]1
     * O etheasametha: [2652]1
     * Oti: [2653]1
     * Odegesei humas eis ten aletheian pasan,: [2654]1
     * 'Ap' arti: [2655]1
     * Ause: [2656]1
     * ALEThEINONThN: [2657]1
     * Th: [2658]1
     * ThS: [2659]1
     * Theos: [2660]1
     * Iesous: [2661]1
     * Kurion 'Iesoun: [2662]1
     * Naue: [2663]1
     * Neuei oun touto Simon Petros puthesthai tis an eie peri hou legei:
       [2664]1
     * Neuei houn touto S. P., kai legei auto, Eipe tis estin peri hou
       legei: [2665]1
     * OS: [2666]1
     * Chrisma: [2667]1
     * Christos: [2668]1
     * a: [2669]1 [2670]2 [2671]3
     * auton: [2672]1
     * b: [2673]1
     * g: [2674]1
     * ginosketai: [2675]1
     * ginoskete: [2676]1
     * ginosko: [2677]1
     * d: [2678]1 [2679]2
     * doxa: [2680]1 [2681]2 [2682]3 [2683]4
     * doxason: [2684]1 [2685]2
     * dusis: [2686]1
     * diairoun: [2687]1
     * doxazein: [2688]1
     * ei de me, eipon an humin, hoti poreuomai: [2689]1
     * eis doxan: [2690]1
     * eis pikrias he ampelos he allotria: [2691]1
     * eis touto: [2692]1
     * zoe: [2693]1
     * theos alethinos: [2694]1
     * kai esmen: [2695]1
     * kakopistias: [2696]1
     * kata panta exomoiousthai bouletai ho planos to huio tou Theou:
       [2697]1
     * kata skopon: [2698]1
     * keiriais: [2699]1
     * kenophonias: [2700]1
     * legei, Kurios 'Iesous: [2701]1
     * luein ton 'Iesoun: [2702]1
     * m: [2703]1 [2704]2 [2705]3
     * menei: [2706]1
     * metron: [2707]1
     * meizon: [2708]1 [2709]2 [2710]3
     * meizon: [2711]1
     * mesembria: [2712]1
     * nardou pistikes polutimou:" pistikos: [2713]1
     * nomos: [2714]1
     * oi chorizein apo tou tes oikonomias anthropou boulomenoi ten
       theoteta: [2715]1
     * oidamen: [2716]1
     * oidate: [2717]1
     * oidate pantes: [2718]1
     * ou: [2719]1
     * ouketi: [2720]1
     * houtos: [2721]1
     * houtos: [2722]1 [2723]2
     * houtos estin ho alethinos kai zoe aionios: [2724]1
     * panta: [2725]1
     * pantas: [2726]1
     * pantos ho pseustes enantios on te aletheia etoi to Christo
       antichristos esti: [2727]1
     * piptei: [2728]1
     * pan pneuma ho luei ton 'Iesoun apo tou Theou ouk ?sti: [2729]1
     * pas hos an me homologe 'I.Ch. en sarkhi eleluthenai: [2730]1
     * paraskeue: [2731]1
     * pisteuete: [2732]1
     * prin 'Abraam genesthai, ego eimi: [2733]1
     * pro emou: [2734]1
     * pros parthous: [2735]1
     * pros parthenous: [2736]1 [2737]2
     * sophia: [2738]1
     * sunete: [2739]1
     * ta eperchomena: [2740]1
     * ten arche;n: [2741]1
     * ten stolen ten archaian: [2742]1
     * ti esometha: [2743]1
     * tis an eie: [2744]1
     * to ?nduma tes aphtharsias: [2745]1
     * to alethinon: [2746]1
     * to husterema: [2747]1
     * to auto chrisma: [2748]1
     * to autou chrisma: [2749]1
     * to stereoma: [2750]1
     * ton alethinon Theon: [2751]1
     * tessarachonta: [2752]1
     * tetereken: [2753]1
     * terese: [2754]1
     * tous kosmokratoras tou skotous toutou: [2755]1
     * tou hagiou endoxotatou apostolou kai euangelistou parthenou
       egapemenou epistethiou 'Ioannou theologou: [2756]1
     * tou parthenou: [2757]1 [2758]2 [2759]3
     * huios: [2760]1
     * chrapho humin, pateres: [2761]1
     * chrisma: [2762]1
     * psuche: [2763]1
     * psuche: [2764]1
     * osanna: [2765]1
     * Orphani: [2766]1
     * angels: [2767]1
     * apostoli: [2768]1
     * b: [2769]1
     * orphano: [2770]1
     * paschein: [2771]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Hebrew Words and Phrases

     * 'kpr: [2772]1 [2773]2
     * 'mbl nphs 'th: [2774]1
     * 'sbh vhqyts tmvntk: [2775]1
     * 'my: [2776]1
     * 'hvh: [2777]1
     * 'sm: [2778]1
     * brk: [2779]1
     * hll: [2780]1
     * hqyts: [2781]1
     * hvsyh n': [2782]1
     * vhdrk: [2783]1
     * vnyr"yhsn: [2784]1
     * vhdrk: [2785]1
     * vytsrv h'ytvt s'lvny: [2786]1
     * cht't: [2787]1
     * ychyrym: [2788]1
     * ychyr: [2789]1
     * ymtqv: [2790]1
     * ynm: [2791]1
     * mnhmdbr: [2792]1
     * ml"sv: [2793]1 [2794]2
     * mchbrrch: [2795]1
     * mchlbnch: [2796]1
     * mvsyv ychyrym byth: [2797]1
     * mtqv: [2798]1
     * nym: [2799]1
     * nm: [2800]1
     * nmh: [2801]1
     * svry: [2802]1
     * vdy: [2803]1 [2804]2
     * l: [2805]1
     * pht: [2806]1
     * phtvt: [2807]1
     * phty: [2808]1
     * phtyvt: [2809]1
     * tsr'l 'v: [2810]1
     * tslch rkv: [2811]1
     * ryq: [2812]1
     * ryq': [2813]1
     * rq': [2814]1
     * rvs: [2815]1
     * smr: [2816]1
     * smrvn: [2817]1
     * smrny: [2818]1
     * sn'h: [2819]1
     * t'mnz: [2820]1
     * tmvnh: [2821]1
     __________________________________________________________________

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

   [2822]i  [2823]iii  [2824]iv  [2825]v  [2826]1  [2827]7  [2828]8
   [2829]9  [2830]10  [2831]11  [2832]12  [2833]13  [2834]14  [2835]15
   [2836]16  [2837]17  [2838]18  [2839]19  [2840]20  [2841]21  [2842]22
   [2843]23  [2844]24  [2845]25  [2846]26  [2847]27  [2848]28  [2849]29
   [2850]30  [2851]31  [2852]32  [2853]33  [2854]34  [2855]35  [2856]36
   [2857]37  [2858]38  [2859]39  [2860]40  [2861]41  [2862]42  [2863]43
   [2864]44  [2865]45  [2866]46  [2867]47  [2868]48  [2869]49  [2870]50
   [2871]51  [2872]52  [2873]53  [2874]54  [2875]55  [2876]56  [2877]57
   [2878]58  [2879]59  [2880]60  [2881]61  [2882]62  [2883]63  [2884]64
   [2885]65  [2886]66  [2887]67  [2888]68  [2889]69  [2890]70  [2891]71
   [2892]72  [2893]73  [2894]74  [2895]75  [2896]76  [2897]77  [2898]78
   [2899]79  [2900]80  [2901]81  [2902]82  [2903]83  [2904]84  [2905]85
   [2906]86  [2907]87  [2908]88  [2909]89  [2910]90  [2911]91  [2912]92
   [2913]93  [2914]94  [2915]95  [2916]96  [2917]97  [2918]98  [2919]99
   [2920]100  [2921]101  [2922]102  [2923]103  [2924]104  [2925]105
   [2926]106  [2927]107  [2928]108  [2929]109  [2930]110  [2931]111
   [2932]112  [2933]113  [2934]114  [2935]115  [2936]116  [2937]117
   [2938]118  [2939]119  [2940]120  [2941]121  [2942]122  [2943]123
   [2944]124  [2945]125  [2946]126  [2947]127  [2948]128  [2949]129
   [2950]130  [2951]131  [2952]132  [2953]133  [2954]134  [2955]135
   [2956]136  [2957]137  [2958]138  [2959]139  [2960]140  [2961]141
   [2962]142  [2963]143  [2964]144  [2965]145  [2966]146  [2967]147
   [2968]148  [2969]149  [2970]150  [2971]151  [2972]152  [2973]153
   [2974]154  [2975]155  [2976]156  [2977]157  [2978]158  [2979]159
   [2980]160  [2981]161  [2982]162  [2983]163  [2984]164  [2985]165
   [2986]166  [2987]167  [2988]168  [2989]169  [2990]170  [2991]171
   [2992]172  [2993]173  [2994]174  [2995]175  [2996]176  [2997]177
   [2998]178  [2999]179  [3000]180  [3001]181  [3002]182  [3003]183
   [3004]184  [3005]185  [3006]186  [3007]187  [3008]188  [3009]189
   [3010]190  [3011]191  [3012]192  [3013]193  [3014]194  [3015]195
   [3016]196  [3017]197  [3018]198  [3019]199  [3020]200  [3021]201
   [3022]202  [3023]203  [3024]204  [3025]205  [3026]206  [3027]207
   [3028]208  [3029]209  [3030]210  [3031]211  [3032]212  [3033]213
   [3034]214  [3035]215  [3036]216  [3037]217  [3038]218  [3039]219
   [3040]220  [3041]221  [3042]222  [3043]223  [3044]224  [3045]225
   [3046]226  [3047]227  [3048]228  [3049]229  [3050]230  [3051]231
   [3052]232  [3053]233  [3054]234  [3055]235  [3056]236  [3057]237
   [3058]238  [3059]239  [3060]240  [3061]241  [3062]242  [3063]243
   [3064]244  [3065]245  [3066]246  [3067]247  [3068]248  [3069]249
   [3070]250  [3071]251  [3072]252  [3073]253  [3074]254  [3075]255
   [3076]256  [3077]257  [3078]258  [3079]259  [3080]260  [3081]261
   [3082]262  [3083]263  [3084]264  [3085]265  [3086]266  [3087]267
   [3088]268  [3089]269  [3090]270  [3091]271  [3092]272  [3093]273
   [3094]274  [3095]275  [3096]276  [3097]277  [3098]278  [3099]279
   [3100]280  [3101]281  [3102]282  [3103]283  [3104]284  [3105]285
   [3106]286  [3107]287  [3108]288  [3109]289  [3110]290  [3111]291
   [3112]292  [3113]293  [3114]294  [3115]295  [3116]296  [3117]297
   [3118]298  [3119]299  [3120]300  [3121]301  [3122]302  [3123]303
   [3124]303  [3125]305  [3126]306  [3127]307  [3128]308  [3129]309
   [3130]310  [3131]311  [3132]312  [3133]313  [3134]314  [3135]315
   [3136]316  [3137]317  [3138]318  [3139]319  [3140]320  [3141]321
   [3142]322  [3143]323  [3144]324  [3145]325  [3146]326  [3147]327
   [3148]328  [3149]329  [3150]330  [3151]331  [3152]332  [3153]333
   [3154]334  [3155]335  [3156]336  [3157]337  [3158]338  [3159]339
   [3160]340  [3161]341  [3162]342  [3163]343  [3164]344  [3165]345
   [3166]346  [3167]347  [3168]348  [3169]349  [3170]350  [3171]351
   [3172]352  [3173]353  [3174]354  [3175]355  [3176]356  [3177]357
   [3178]358  [3179]359  [3180]360  [3181]361  [3182]362  [3183]363
   [3184]364  [3185]365  [3186]366  [3187]367  [3188]368  [3189]369
   [3190]370  [3191]371  [3192]372  [3193]373  [3194]374  [3195]375
   [3196]376  [3197]377  [3198]378  [3199]379  [3200]380  [3201]381
   [3202]382  [3203]383  [3204]384  [3205]385  [3206]386  [3207]387
   [3208]388  [3209]389  [3210]390  [3211]391  [3212]392  [3213]393
   [3214]394  [3215]395  [3216]396  [3217]397  [3218]398  [3219]399
   [3220]400  [3221]401  [3222]402  [3223]403  [3224]404  [3225]405
   [3226]406  [3227]407  [3228]408  [3229]409  [3230]410  [3231]411
   [3232]412  [3233]413  [3234]414  [3235]415  [3236]416  [3237]417
   [3238]418  [3239]419  [3240]420  [3241]421  [3242]422  [3243]423
   [3244]424  [3245]425  [3246]426  [3247]427  [3248]428  [3249]429
   [3250]430  [3251]431  [3252]432  [3253]433  [3254]434  [3255]435
   [3256]436  [3257]437  [3258]438  [3259]439  [3260]440  [3261]441
   [3262]442  [3263]443  [3264]444  [3265]445  [3266]446  [3267]447
   [3268]448  [3269]449  [3270]450  [3271]451  [3272]452  [3273]453
   [3274]456  [3275]457  [3276]460  [3277]461  [3278]462  [3279]463
   [3280]464  [3281]465  [3282]466  [3283]467  [3284]468  [3285]469
   [3286]470  [3287]471  [3288]472  [3289]473  [3290]474  [3291]475
   [3292]476  [3293]477  [3294]478  [3295]479  [3296]480  [3297]481
   [3298]482  [3299]483  [3300]484  [3301]485  [3302]486  [3303]487
   [3304]488  [3305]489  [3306]490  [3307]491  [3308]492  [3309]493
   [3310]494  [3311]495  [3312]496  [3313]497  [3314]498  [3315]499
   [3316]500  [3317]501  [3318]502  [3319]503  [3320]504  [3321]505
   [3322]506  [3323]507  [3324]508  [3325]509  [3326]510  [3327]511
   [3328]512  [3329]513  [3330]514  [3331]515  [3332]516  [3333]517
   [3334]518  [3335]519  [3336]520  [3337]521  [3338]522  [3339]523
   [3340]524  [3341]525  [3342]526  [3343]527  [3344]528  [3345]529
   [3346]531  [3347]533  [3348]537  [3349]538  [3350]539  [3351]540
   [3352]541  [3353]542  [3354]543  [3355]544  [3356]545  [3357]546
   [3358]547  [3359]548  [3360]549  [3361]550  [3362]551  [3363]552
   [3364]553  [3365]554  [3366]555  [3367]556  [3368]557  [3369]558
   [3370]559  [3371]560
     __________________________________________________________________

            This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
               Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
                   generated on demand from ThML source.

References

   1. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.ii-p32.1
   2. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.x-p13.1
   3. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xxvii-p25.1
   4. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xliv-p51.1
   5. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.xxi-p7.1
   6. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.xlv-p12.1
   7. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.xlv-p14.1
   8. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.xxi-p7.1
   9. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.xxi-p7.1
  10. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iv.xi-p29.1
  11. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii.xxiii-p14.1
  12. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=22#iii.cxxi-p9.1
  13. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iii.iii-p31.1
  14. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iii.x-p27.1
  15. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iv.iv-p15.1
  16. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.xliii-p21.1
  17. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.ix-p40.1
  18. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.xviii-p41.1
  19. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.lxxiv-p8.1
  20. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iii.viii-p50.1
  21. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.l-p52.1
  22. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iii.cxxi-p10.1
  23. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=6&scrV=16#iii.cxxi-p8.1
  24. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=6#iii.vii-p7.1
  25. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=8#iii.viii-p10.1
  26. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iii.vii-p7.1
  27. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iii.vii-p28.1
  28. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iii.xxix-p9.1
  29. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iii.xi-p10.1
  30. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=14&scrV=14#iii.xi-p10.1
  31. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=16&scrV=4#iv.xiii-p64.1
  32. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=16&scrV=9#iii.xii-p39.1
  33. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=17&scrV=10#iii.xxxi-p10.1
  34. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=19&scrV=24#iii.lii-p11.1
  35. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=9#iii.xiii-p9.1
  36. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=9#iii.xii-p37.1
  37. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=21&scrV=10#iii.xii-p28.1
  38. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#iii.vii-p26.1
  39. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#iii.x-p24.1
  40. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#iii.xiii-p6.1
  41. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=22&scrV=18#iv.iv-p96.1
  42. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=24&scrV=2#iii.xliv-p47.1
  43. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iii.lxxiv-p9.1
  44. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=2#iii.xxix-p10.1
  45. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=5#iii.xi-p11.1
  46. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=28&scrV=12#iii.viii-p56.1
  47. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=29&scrV=12#iii.xi-p12.1
  48. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gen&scrCh=37&scrV=28#iii.xlii-p9.1
  49. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.xlii-p11.1
  50. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.xii-p25.1
  51. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.xiii-p5.1
  52. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.xliv-p40.1
  53. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.xxxix-p19.1
  54. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.iii-p5.1
  55. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.xl-p19.1
  56. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.xli-p8.1
  57. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.c-p30.1
  58. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.v-p33.1
  59. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.xii-p25.1
  60. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.xiii-p5.1
  61. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.lxii-p10.1
  62. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xcii-p12.1
  63. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iii.xiv-p34.1
  64. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii.ii-p42.1
  65. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iv.xi-p33.1
  66. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iii.lvi-p5.2
  67. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iii.lvi-p5.2
  68. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=22#iii.li-p6.1
  69. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=23#iii.lvi-p5.2
  70. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=23#iii.lvi-p7.1
  71. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iii.lvi-p5.2
  72. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iii.xlii-p12.1
  73. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii.xcii-p13.1
  74. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii.iv-p48.1
  75. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=14&scrV=29#iii.lvi-p5.1
  76. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=16&scrV=0#iii.xcii-p14.1
  77. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=17&scrV=6#iii.xcii-p15.1
  78. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=3#iii.iv-p46.1
  79. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=8#iii.xxi-p6.1
  80. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=10#iii.xxxi-p11.1
  81. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=12#iii.l-p32.1
  82. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=20&scrV=17#iii.xlii-p47.1
  83. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=30&scrV=7#iii.l-p73.1
  84. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=31&scrV=18#iii.l-p57.1
  85. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=32&scrV=1#iii.iv-p49.1
  86. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=11#iii.iv-p40.1
  87. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=13#iii.iv-p40.1
  88. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=13#iii.liv-p39.1
  89. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Exod&scrCh=33&scrV=20#iii.iv-p40.1
  90. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=19&scrV=18#iii.lxvi-p4.1
  91. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=23&scrV=8#iii.xlv-p30.1
  92. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Lev&scrCh=26&scrV=1#iii.iv-p47.1
  93. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=11&scrV=32#iii.lxxiv-p5.1
  94. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.xii-p24.1
  95. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=20&scrV=11#iii.xxix-p33.1
  96. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Num&scrCh=21&scrV=6#iii.xiii-p26.1
  97. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.xlii-p12.1
  98. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=9&scrV=10#iii.cxxiii-p22.1
  99. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iii.xliv-p15.1
 100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=13&scrV=5#iii.cxv-p9.1
 101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=18&scrV=18#iii.xvi-p37.1
 102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iii.xxxvii-p22.1
 103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=19&scrV=15#iii.cxiv-p15.1
 104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Deut&scrCh=34&scrV=6#iii.cxxv-p7.1
 105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xcii-p16.4
 106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.xcii-p17.1
 107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Josh&scrCh=10&scrV=12#iii.xcii-p18.1
 108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Judg&scrCh=15&scrV=19#iii.xcii-p19.1
 109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iv.x-p28.1
 110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Sam&scrCh=19&scrV=0#iv.xi-p14.1
 111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iv.viii-p28.1
 112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Kgs&scrCh=17&scrV=21#iii.xcii-p5.1
 113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.lxxv-p13.1
 114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.xcii-p20.1
 115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.cxxv-p9.1
 116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=4&scrV=35#iii.xcii-p6.1
 117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=13&scrV=21#iii.xcii-p7.1
 118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Kgs&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.xlii-p10.1
 119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.xlii-p35.1
 120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iv.ix-p37.1
 121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.vii-p21.1
 122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iii.cx-p21.1
 123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iii.cxxv-p17.1
 124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=9&scrV=24#iii.xxix-p7.1
 125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iii.cxxv-p19.1
 126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=14&scrV=4#iii.xlii-p36.1
 127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Job&scrCh=25&scrV=6#iii.ii-p37.1
 128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iii.vii-p55.1
 129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.v-p65.1
 130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.cxvi-p7.1
 131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.cxviii-p19.1
 132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii.lxxviii-p6.1
 133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv.v-p32.1
 134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii.iii-p28.1
 135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.vii-p23.1
 136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.vi-p40.1
 137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iii.lxxxiii-p17.1
 138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.xlviii-p28.1
 139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.xxxv-p6.1
 140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.xiii-p28.1
 141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.xli-p29.1
 142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv.xii-p15.1
 143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii.xxxv-p12.1
 144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.cxi-p21.1
 145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iv.xii-p15.1
 146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=6&scrV=6#iii.xxxv-p13.1
 147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=7&scrV=8#iii.xxvi-p10.1
 148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iii.cx-p9.1
 149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=9&scrV=7#iii.xxvi-p18.1
 150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=2#iii.v-p26.1
 151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iii.ci-p8.1
 152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iv.xiii-p48.1
 153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=10&scrV=14#iii.lxxvi-p4.1
 154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iii.viii-p43.1
 155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iii.lxxxiv-p14.1
 156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iii.lxxxviii-p15.1
 157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iv.xiii-p40.1
 158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.iii-p29.1
 159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iii.xii-p19.1
 160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=16&scrV=2#iv.xi-p73.1
 161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iv.vi-p59.1
 162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=17&scrV=15#iii.ciii-p13.1
 163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=1#iii.lxxii-p9.1
 164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=28#iii.xv-p13.1
 165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=18&scrV=44#iii.xxxii-p31.1
 166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=2#iii.lxiii-p19.1
 167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=3#iv.v-p21.1
 168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=4#iii.xciv-p4.1
 169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=4#iv.iv-p13.1
 170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iii.ix-p11.1
 171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=5#iii.lx-p10.1
 172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=7#iii.xxiii-p27.1
 173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iii.xliv-p17.1
 174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iii.lxxxvi-p9.1
 175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iii.lxxxix-p9.1
 176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iv.xii-p30.1
 177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=6#iii.ii-p36.1
 178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=16#iii.lxxxvii-p6.1
 179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=16#iii.cvi-p14.1
 180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=16#iii.cvi-p15.1
 181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=17#iii.xxxvi-p20.1
 182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=20#iii.xi-p28.1
 183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=22&scrV=27#iv.v-p12.1
 184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=24&scrV=0#iii.vii-p55.1
 185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=1#iii.xxiv-p16.1
 186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=8#iii.xxxiv-p12.1
 187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=10#iii.cxxv-p32.1
 188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=25&scrV=18#iii.l-p53.1
 189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=0#iv.xii-p42.1
 190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=26&scrV=4#iii.iv-p52.1
 191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=11#iv.vii-p49.1
 192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=27&scrV=12#iii.iii-p19.1
 193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=30&scrV=11#iv.xii-p25.1
 194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=7#iv.ix-p23.1
 195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=32&scrV=9#iv.xi-p30.1
 196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=5#iii.xx-p22.1
 197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=33&scrV=9#iii.xxi-p8.1
 198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=2#iii.lix-p12.1
 199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=2#iv.xiii-p31.1
 200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=5#iii.cxiii-p17.1
 201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=5#iv.iv-p30.1
 202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=16#iv.xii-p33.1
 203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=18#iii.xiii-p12.1
 204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=34&scrV=18#iii.xvi-p42.1
 205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=10#iii.xx-p23.1
 206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=12#iii.cxv-p7.1
 207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=13#iii.xi-p7.1
 208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=13#iii.xi-p8.1
 209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=13#iii.xi-p17.1
 210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=18#iii.cvii-p4.1
 211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=20#iii.xi-p5.1
 212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=35&scrV=27#iii.xi-p27.1
 213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=6#iii.liv-p13.1
 214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=6#iii.liii-p16.1
 215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=7#iii.xxvi-p23.1
 216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=7#iii.xxxi-p8.1
 217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=8#iii.xxvii-p17.1
 218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=8#iii.xxvi-p39.1
 219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=9#iii.c-p26.1
 220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=36&scrV=9#iii.xvi-p24.1
 221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=0#iv.iv-p99.1
 222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=2#iv.vii-p30.2
 223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=37&scrV=4#iii.xxvii-p15.1
 224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=38&scrV=10#iii.xxxv-p14.1
 225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=5#iii.cxxiii-p20.1
 226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=14#iii.xxxix-p7.1
 227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=40&scrV=14#iii.li-p8.1
 228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=1#iv.x-p45.1
 229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=4#iii.xxi-p27.1
 230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=41&scrV=11#iii.xi-p40.1
 231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=0#iii.xxiv-p15.1
 232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=6#iii.lxxi-p5.1
 233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=42&scrV=8#iii.xciv-p24.1
 234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=43&scrV=1#iii.xliv-p27.1
 235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=43&scrV=1#iii.xlv-p43.1
 236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=43&scrV=1#iii.liii-p15.1
 237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=43&scrV=1#iii.lxxvii-p5.1
 238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=2#iii.lviii-p11.1
 239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=2#iv.xii-p47.1
 240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=3#iii.xxxiv-p8.1
 241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=3#iii.cxiv-p19.1
 242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=7#iii.xliv-p30.1
 243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=45&scrV=8#iii.xxvi-p25.1
 244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=8#iii.xxxv-p19.1
 245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=46&scrV=10#iii.lviii-p24.1
 246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=47&scrV=3#iii.xiv-p10.1
 247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=49&scrV=3#iii.v-p7.1
 248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=0#iv.xi-p4.4
 249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=0#iv.xi-p6.4
 250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=3#iii.v-p5.1
 251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=3#iii.xxix-p20.1
 252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=3#iii.xxix-p37.1
 253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=50&scrV=3#iii.xxxviii-p20.1
 254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=3#iv.iv-p49.1
 255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=3#iv.xii-p35.1
 256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=7#iii.v-p24.1
 257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=7#iii.cxx-p15.1
 258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=8#iii.lviii-p22.1
 259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=8#iii.lviii-p36.1
 260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=9#iv.iv-p49.1
 261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=9#iv.xii-p34.1
 262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=10#iii.xxvi-p40.1
 263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=51&scrV=11#iii.xiii-p30.1
 264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=53&scrV=23#iii.xxiv-p29.1
 265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=10#iv.xiii-p32.1
 266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=56&scrV=11#iv.xiii-p33.1
 267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=4#iii.xliii-p22.1
 268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=4#iii.cxv-p11.1
 269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=57&scrV=7#iii.cxiv-p21.1
 270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=59&scrV=0#iv.iv-p12.1
 271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=59&scrV=10#iii.lxxxvii-p16.1
 272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=62&scrV=0#iv.v-p18.1
 273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=65&scrV=0#iv.xi-p9.1
 274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=65&scrV=4#iii.xvi-p23.1
 275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=4#iii.cxxii-p5.1
 276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=6#iii.xxvii-p36.1
 277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=6#iii.lxxvii-p8.1
 278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=20#iii.xliv-p34.1
 279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=68&scrV=21#iii.cxxv-p37.1
 280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=4#iii.lxxx-p16.1
 281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=21#iii.xxxii-p15.1
 282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=21#iii.cxx-p14.1
 283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=22#iii.xviii-p37.1
 284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=22#iii.xxxviii-p16.1
 285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=69&scrV=32#iii.lxiv-p4.1
 286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=72&scrV=3#iii.ii-p10.1
 287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=72&scrV=18#iii.xcii-p29.1
 288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=1#iii.xxvi-p38.1
 289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=1#iii.xxix-p24.1
 290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=9#iii.cxxv-p36.1
 291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=27#iv.xii-p57.1
 292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=28#iii.c-p27.1
 293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=73&scrV=28#iv.xiii-p30.1
 294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=74&scrV=21#iii.viii-p4.1
 295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=75&scrV=2#iii.xxix-p16.1
 296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=1#iii.cvi-p4.1
 297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=1#iii.cvii-p9.1
 298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=2#iii.cxii-p27.1
 299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=76&scrV=2#iii.cxii-p28.1
 300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=77&scrV=9#iii.cxxv-p20.1
 301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=24#iii.xiv-p13.1
 302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=78&scrV=25#iv.iv-p9.1
 303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=80&scrV=7#iii.liv-p35.1
 304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#iii.ii-p17.1
 305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#iii.xlix-p28.1
 306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#iv.v-p79.1
 307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=6#iii.lv-p10.1
 308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=82&scrV=8#iii.x-p33.1
 309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=4#iii.lxviii-p13.1
 310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=4#iii.cvi-p11.1
 311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=6#iii.xvi-p44.1
 312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=7#iii.xvii-p14.1
 313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=84&scrV=10#iii.lxxxvii-p15.1
 314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=11#iii.xxxv-p21.1
 315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=11#iii.xlii-p5.1
 316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=85&scrV=12#iii.xxviii-p8.1
 317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=11#iii.xlvi-p40.1
 318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=11#iii.xcvii-p12.1
 319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=86&scrV=15#iii.xxxiv-p14.1
 320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=88&scrV=4#iii.xlii-p25.1
 321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=89&scrV=15#iii.xciv-p13.1
 322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=90&scrV=4#iii.lxv-p7.1
 323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=8#iii.xix-p14.1
 324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=11#iii.lxi-p12.1
 325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=11#iii.cxvi-p4.1
 326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=94&scrV=14#iii.xxix-p17.1
 327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=97&scrV=3#iii.xxix-p38.1
 328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=101&scrV=1#iii.xxxvii-p9.1
 329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=101&scrV=1#iii.lv-p19.1
 330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=101&scrV=1#iv.xii-p40.1
 331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=13#iii.viii-p19.1
 332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=27#iii.xxxix-p26.1
 333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=102&scrV=27#iv.v-p31.1
 334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=5#iii.lxvi-p7.1
 335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=5#iii.ciii-p12.1
 336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=103&scrV=18#iii.lxxxii-p11.1
 337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=23#iii.xlvi-p48.1
 338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=24#iii.ii-p44.1
 339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=104&scrV=24#iii.xxxviii-p14.1
 340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=105&scrV=4#iii.lxiv-p5.1
 341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=0#iv.xi-p4.2
 342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=106&scrV=0#iv.xi-p6.2
 343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=108&scrV=5#iii.lii-p22.1
 344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=108&scrV=5#iii.ci-p10.1
 345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=1#iii.ix-p23.1
 346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#iii.iv-p21.1
 347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#iv.iv-p14.1
 348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=110&scrV=3#iv.v-p34.1
 349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=112&scrV=1#iii.v-p27.1
 350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=1#iii.cvi-p5.1
 351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=1#iii.cvi-p6.1
 352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=3#iii.cvi-p5.1
 353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=113&scrV=3#iii.cvi-p6.1
 354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=115&scrV=8#iii.x-p42.1
 355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=10#iii.xlvi-p24.1
 356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=11#iii.xl-p20.1
 357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=11#iii.cxii-p5.1
 358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=12#iii.lxxiii-p6.1
 359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=12#iv.viii-p20.1
 360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=15#iii.xlviii-p5.1
 361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=16#iii.xxxv-p18.1
 362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=116&scrV=16#iii.cxiii-p18.1
 363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=0#iii.lii-p7.1
 364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=15#iii.xlvi-p38.1
 365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=22#iii.x-p38.1
 366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=118&scrV=25#iii.lii-p7.2
 367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=73#iii.xli-p16.1
 368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=85#iv.xiii-p22.1
 369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=85#iv.xiii-p41.1
 370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=96#iv.xiii-p26.1
 371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=96#iv.xiii-p38.1
 372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=165#iii.xciv-p6.1
 373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=119&scrV=165#iv.iv-p88.1
 374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=1#iii.ii-p21.1
 375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=4#iii.xliv-p6.1
 376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=121&scrV=6#iv.iv-p82.1
 377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=123&scrV=1#iii.lxx-p7.1
 378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=126&scrV=5#iii.xvi-p55.1
 379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=1#iii.liii-p28.1
 380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=127&scrV=1#iii.xliv-p7.1
 381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=130&scrV=0#iv.ix-p45.1
 382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=130&scrV=1#iii.xvi-p14.1
 383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=131&scrV=17#iii.vi-p33.1
 384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=6#iv.iv-p59.1
 385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=17#iii.iii-p22.1
 386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=17#iii.viii-p53.1
 387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=17#iii.xxiv-p7.1
 388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=132&scrV=17#iii.xxxvi-p9.1
 389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=138&scrV=6#iii.xvi-p43.1
 390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=7#iii.xxxvii-p17.1
 391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=7#iv.ix-p22.1
 392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=139&scrV=8#iii.cxii-p15.1
 393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=142&scrV=4#iii.xxxix-p6.1
 394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=142&scrV=4#iii.li-p9.1
 395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=5#iii.xl-p8.1
 396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=147&scrV=7#iv.vii-p18.1
 397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=0#iv.xi-p4.3
 398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=0#iv.xi-p6.3
 399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ps&scrCh=148&scrV=5#iii.ii-p19.1
 400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.xii-p10.1
 401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.xxxiv-p17.1
 402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.x-p27.1
 403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iii.xi-p21.1
 404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=13#iii.xcviii-p8.1
 405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=18#iv.ix-p63.1
 406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=9&scrV=18#iv.ix-p66.1
 407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=12&scrV=28#iv.xv-p9.1
 408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iv.xii-p10.1
 409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=16&scrV=22#iv.ix-p65.1
 410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=20&scrV=8#iii.xlii-p29.1
 411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=1#iii.lxxxv-p11.1
 412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=1#iii.xlviii-p8.1
 413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=1#iii.xlviii-p28.2
 414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=1#iii.lxxxv-p5.1
 415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=2#iii.lxxxv-p11.1
 416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=23&scrV=3#iii.lxxxv-p11.1
 417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=2#iii.xxxvii-p6.1
 418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=27&scrV=2#iii.lix-p6.1
 419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Prov&scrCh=31&scrV=26#iii.viii-p30.1
 420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=16#iii.xcvi-p13.1
 421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=7&scrV=20#iii.xcvi-p13.1
 422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eccl&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.ii-p40.1
 423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.xxvii-p19.1
 424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.li-p19.1
 425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.c-p25.1
 426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.xii-p52.1
 427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.c-p22.1
 428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.xvi-p39.1
 429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii.lviii-p14.1
 430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.lvii-p17.1
 431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=6&scrV=8#iii.vii-p17.1
 432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=6&scrV=8#iii.vi-p23.1
 433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=7&scrV=6#iii.lxvi-p15.1
 434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=5#iii.lxvi-p5.1
 435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=8&scrV=6#iii.lxvi-p10.1
 436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.xi-p29.1
 437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.iv-p98.1
 438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii.vii-p24.1
 439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii.lxxxi-p7.1
 440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iii.xi-p19.1
 441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iii.liv-p9.1
 442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iii.xxx-p10.1
 443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iii.xvi-p40.1
 444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iii.xxviii-p16.1
 445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iii.xlvi-p15.1
 446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=7&scrV=9#iii.lxx-p8.1
 447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=8&scrV=8#iii.xxxii-p7.1
 448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=2#iii.viii-p51.1
 449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=9&scrV=6#iii.xxv-p15.1
 450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=10&scrV=23#iii.xviii-p21.1
 451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iii.cxxiii-p26.1
 452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=14#iii.xviii-p40.1
 453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=14&scrV=27#iii.iv-p22.1
 454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=3#iii.cxxii-p10.1
 455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=26&scrV=10#iii.cxii-p23.1
 456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=16#iii.viii-p57.1
 457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=28&scrV=22#iii.xviii-p21.1
 458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=35&scrV=4#iii.xxv-p16.1
 459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=1#iii.viii-p5.1
 460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=3#iii.v-p18.1
 461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=3#iii.vi-p14.1
 462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=3#iii.xiv-p6.1
 463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=40&scrV=6#iii.xxv-p10.1
 464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=14#iii.xxxiv-p13.1
 465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=42&scrV=14#iii.xxix-p22.1
 466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=11#iii.lxix-p5.1
 467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=11#iii.lxxxvii-p5.1
 468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=11#iii.xcvii-p5.1
 469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=45&scrV=11#iii.cvi-p18.1
 470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=46&scrV=8#iii.xix-p16.1
 471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=49&scrV=8#iii.cv-p7.1
 472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=52&scrV=3#iii.xlii-p16.1
 473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=1#iii.xlix-p25.1
 474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=2#iv.xii-p49.1
 475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=5#iii.xxxvi-p19.1
 476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#iii.v-p6.1
 477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#iii.xxix-p21.1
 478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#iii.xxxviii-p21.1
 479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#iii.xlvii-p9.1
 480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#iii.li-p5.1
 481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#iii.lvi-p6.1
 482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#iii.cxvii-p8.1
 483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=7#iii.cxxi-p14.1
 484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=12#iii.xxxii-p36.1
 485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=53&scrV=12#iii.cxviii-p15.1
 486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=58&scrV=7#iii.xviii-p26.1
 487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=59&scrV=1#iii.xlii-p18.1
 488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=61&scrV=10#iv.iv-p17.1
 489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=63&scrV=16#iii.xviii-p39.1
 490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=4#iii.xli-p25.1
 491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Isa&scrCh=64&scrV=4#iv.x-p7.1
 492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.lxxxi-p6.1
 493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=17&scrV=5#iv.vii-p33.1
 494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=24#iii.xxxvii-p18.1
 495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jer&scrCh=23&scrV=24#iii.xli-p19.1
 496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xlii-p10.2
 497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.lxxxii-p8.1
 498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=16&scrV=3#iii.xliii-p19.1
 499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=18&scrV=21#iii.xxxiv-p19.1
 500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=34&scrV=4#iii.xlvi-p31.1
 501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Ezek&scrCh=36&scrV=20#iv.x-p30.1
 502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=34#iii.x-p37.1
 503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=34#iii.v-p11.1
 504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=34#iv.iv-p94.1
 505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=2&scrV=35#iv.vi-p35.1
 506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=0#iii.xii-p41.1
 507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.xliv-p37.1
 508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iii.lix-p15.2
 509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iii.xcii-p22.1
 510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=50#iv.xi-p34.1
 511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=3&scrV=88#iii.lix-p15.1
 512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=22#iii.xcii-p21.1
 513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=6&scrV=22#iv.xi-p32.1
 514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Dan&scrCh=13&scrV=36#iii.xxxvii-p24.1
 515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.ii-p11.1
 516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.iv-p27.1
 517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.xcvi-p16.1
 518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Hab&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.xxiii-p15.1
 519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=10#iii.xxxvii-p28.1
 520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Zech&scrCh=12&scrV=13#iii.xxii-p33.1
 521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.xii-p34.1
 522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.xxxvi-p21.1
 523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mal&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.xv-p22.1
 524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.x-p14.1
 525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.iv-p6.1
 526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.iv-p14.1
 527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii.cxvi-p6.1
 528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.xxxii-p6.1
 529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.cxvi-p6.1
 530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iii.xxxii-p5.1
 531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iii.xliii-p13.1
 532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.x-p41.1
 533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.xxix-p39.1
 534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.vii-p19.1
 535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.vi-p8.1
 536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.xiv-p4.1
 537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.v-p31.1
 538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.vi-p20.1
 539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.vii-p15.1
 540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.v-p35.1
 541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.xi-p23.1
 542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.c-p14.1
 543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.x-p51.1
 544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.liii-p8.1
 545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.v-p78.1
 546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.lii-p25.1
 547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iii.viii-p26.1
 548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iii.xliii-p5.1
 549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iii.cxxiii-p5.1
 550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.xxvii-p4.1
 551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.xxix-p32.1
 552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.xlvi-p52.1
 553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv.xi-p45.1
 554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.ii-p26.1
 555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.ii-p49.1
 556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.iv-p42.1
 557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.liv-p43.1
 558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xx-p31.1
 559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xxvii-p41.1
 560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xxi-p26.1
 561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xxii-p40.1
 562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.vii-p36.1
 563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.lxix-p18.1
 564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.cxii-p24.1
 565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.x-p44.1
 566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iii.lxxxix-p12.1
 567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.viii-p15.1
 568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iv.iv-p97.1
 569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.xxiv-p12.1
 570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.lv-p16.1
 571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iii.cxviii-p13.1
 572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.xlvi-p49.1
 573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.lxxxiii-p7.1
 574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.xi-p11.1
 575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.viii-p29.1
 576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.cxxiii-p32.1
 577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iv.ix-p78.1
 578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iii.xlvi-p39.1
 579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=39#iii.cxiv-p20.1
 580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=41#iii.xx-p15.1
 581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#iv.iv-p77.1
 582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=44#iv.xii-p18.1
 583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=45#iii.x-p43.1
 584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=46#iv.xi-p22.1
 585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=5&scrV=48#iv.iv-p67.1
 586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv.xi-p8.1
 587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iv.ix-p20.1
 588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iii.lii-p34.1
 589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=5#iii.xlvii-p17.1
 590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.xlix-p32.1
 591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.lxviii-p14.1
 592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.lxxxii-p10.1
 593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.lxxiv-p16.1
 594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iii.lxix-p13.1
 595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iv.xii-p14.1
 596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=11#iii.xcii-p28.1
 597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.xxvii-p30.1
 598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.lvii-p13.1
 599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.lviii-p8.1
 600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.lviii-p35.1
 601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.lix-p17.1
 602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.lxxviii-p16.1
 603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.cxxv-p23.1
 604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iv.x-p9.1
 605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.liii-p27.1
 606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii.liv-p21.1
 607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii.cxxv-p18.1
 608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.x-p16.1
 609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=33#iii.cxxiii-p14.1
 610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=6&scrV=34#iii.lxiii-p16.1
 611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=7#iii.iii-p20.1
 612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=16#iii.xlvii-p21.1
 613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iii.l-p51.1
 614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=24#iii.lxxiii-p9.1
 615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=24#iii.xxiv-p4.1
 616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=7&scrV=24#iii.viii-p37.1
 617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=0#iii.l-p15.1
 618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=5#iii.xvii-p11.1
 619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iii.l-p70.1
 620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=17#iii.xcii-p25.1
 621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=21#iii.l-p39.1
 622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=22#iii.xxiii-p16.1
 623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=22#iii.xxiv-p24.1
 624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=24#iii.l-p48.1
 625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=29#iv.v-p48.1
 626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=8&scrV=29#iv.xiii-p10.1
 627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=9#iii.lxii-p9.1
 628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=12#iv.xi-p47.1
 629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#iii.l-p16.1
 630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=13#iii.l-p55.1
 631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.lxxvi-p5.1
 632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=9&scrV=20#iv.xi-p17.1
 633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=16#iii.viii-p14.1
 634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=17#iii.xcv-p5.1
 635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=20#iii.c-p32.1
 636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=20#iii.ci-p5.1
 637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=22#iii.xlii-p6.1
 638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=22#iii.xlvi-p37.1
 639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=23#iii.xlvii-p28.1
 640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=26#iii.liv-p16.1
 641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=27#iii.lviii-p28.1
 642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=27#iii.cxiv-p16.1
 643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#iii.xliv-p38.1
 644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#iii.xlviii-p32.1
 645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=28#iii.xlviii-p48.1
 646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=33#iii.cvii-p18.1
 647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=40#iii.lv-p13.1
 648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=40#iii.xc-p6.1
 649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=10&scrV=41#iv.viii-p29.1
 650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=7#iii.v-p20.1
 651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#iii.vi-p45.1
 652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#iii.x-p40.1
 653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#iii.xiv-p7.1
 654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#iii.xxxvi-p5.1
 655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#iii.cxxiii-p34.1
 656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=11#iii.viii-p45.1
 657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=14#iii.v-p14.1
 658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iii.xxxii-p10.1
 659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iii.xlviii-p13.1
 660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iii.ciii-p10.1
 661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#iii.xvi-p26.1
 662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=28#iii.xxvi-p42.1
 663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iii.xxxv-p17.1
 664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iii.xiii-p14.1
 665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iii.xiii-p15.1
 666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iv.vi-p47.1
 667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=16#iv.vi-p47.1
 668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=24#iv.xv-p15.1
 669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=30#iii.cxii-p18.1
 670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=34#iv.vi-p46.1
 671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=12&scrV=46#iii.xi-p14.1
 672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iii.iv-p4.1
 673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=24#iii.lxix-p12.1
 674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=38#iii.lxiv-p12.1
 675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=38#iii.cxvi-p9.1
 676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=38#iii.lxix-p12.1
 677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=39#iii.xvi-p56.1
 678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=43#iii.lxiv-p10.1
 679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=46#iv.viii-p40.1
 680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=47#iii.cxxiii-p31.1
 681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=48#iii.cxxiii-p17.1
 682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=13&scrV=57#iii.xlv-p33.1
 683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=15#iii.xcii-p8.1
 684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=25#iii.iii-p9.1
 685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=25#iii.xxi-p16.1
 686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=25#iii.xcii-p9.1
 687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=26#iii.iv-p15.1
 688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=14&scrV=36#iii.lxxii-p11.1
 689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iii.xxxii-p34.1
 690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iii.xlviii-p17.1
 691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iii.l-p74.1
 692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=15&scrV=32#iii.xcii-p8.1
 693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=13#iii.xxvi-p24.1
 694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=13#iv.xiii-p11.1
 695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=15#iii.cxix-p16.1
 696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iii.cx-p16.1
 697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iii.xxvii-p20.1
 698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iii.cxxv-p24.1
 699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iii.l-p20.1
 700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iii.l-p67.1
 701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iii.li-p31.1
 702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iii.cxiv-p12.1
 703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iii.cxix-p16.1
 704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=19#iv.xiii-p68.1
 705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=21#iii.cxxiv-p9.1
 706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#iii.xxviii-p19.1
 707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=23#iii.cx-p16.1
 708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=16&scrV=27#iii.xlv-p25.1
 709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=3#iii.cxxv-p8.1
 710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=10#iii.v-p14.1
 711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=17&scrV=20#iii.xli-p23.1
 712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=10#iii.xcvii-p14.1
 713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=16#iii.xxxvii-p22.1
 714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=18&scrV=18#iii.xxiii-p21.1
 715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=6#iii.x-p6.1
 716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=6#iv.iv-p16.1
 717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=12#iii.xxi-p10.1
 718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=17#iii.xxiii-p6.1
 719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=21#iii.cxxiii-p6.1
 720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=27#iii.cxx-p10.1
 721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=27#iii.cxxiii-p6.1
 722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=28#iii.xxix-p18.1
 723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=19&scrV=29#iii.cxx-p10.1
 724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=9#iii.lxviii-p8.1
 725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=10#iii.xviii-p13.1
 726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=19#iii.viii-p49.1
 727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=22#iii.xxix-p14.1
 728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=28#iii.lii-p37.1
 729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=20&scrV=30#iii.xlix-p11.1
 730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=1#iii.lii-p16.1
 731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=9#iii.cx-p9.1
 732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=23#iii.iii-p21.1
 733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=23#iii.vi-p31.1
 734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=23#iii.xxxvi-p8.1
 735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=21&scrV=25#iii.vi-p17.1
 736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=3#iii.xi-p20.1
 737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=13#iii.x-p34.1
 738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=13#iii.xlv-p22.1
 739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=15#iii.xlii-p13.1
 740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=21#iii.xli-p30.1
 741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=30#iii.xiii-p18.1
 742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=31#iii.xliv-p40.1
 743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=32#iii.l-p38.1
 744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#iii.xviii-p19.1
 745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#iii.xlii-p53.1
 746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#iii.lxvi-p12.1
 747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=37#iv.xiii-p44.1
 748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=40#iii.xlix-p30.1
 749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=40#iii.lxxxviii-p5.1
 750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=42#iii.xlix-p10.1
 751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=22&scrV=45#iii.ix-p24.1
 752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=2#iii.vi-p35.1
 753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=2#iii.xlvii-p23.1
 754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=2#iii.cxxiii-p33.1
 755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=3#iii.xii-p31.1
 756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=3#iv.ix-p79.3
 757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=3#iv.ix-p82.1
 758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=8#iv.vi-p70.1
 759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=10#iii.lxxviii-p8.1
 760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=27#iii.iv-p16.1
 761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=23&scrV=37#iii.xvi-p11.1
 762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=9#iii.xcv-p4.1
 763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=12#iii.xxvi-p16.1
 764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=12#iii.lviii-p29.1
 765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=13#iii.xxviii-p28.1
 766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=23#iv.iv-p58.1
 767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=24#iv.v-p76.1
 768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=31#iii.cxix-p11.1
 769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=24&scrV=35#iii.lxxiii-p14.1
 770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=21#iii.lxxxvi-p5.1
 771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=21#iii.lxxxix-p10.1
 772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=23#iii.xxvi-p33.1
 773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=25#iii.xi-p36.1
 774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=31#iv.vii-p11.1
 775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=31#iii.xxii-p16.1
 776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iii.xxvi-p6.1
 777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iii.xxii-p34.1
 778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iii.xlv-p24.1
 779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iv.vi-p60.1
 780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=34#iii.lxix-p14.1
 781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#iii.li-p16.1
 782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=40#iii.lii-p35.1
 783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#iii.xxii-p34.1
 784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#iii.xlv-p24.1
 785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#iv.vi-p61.1
 786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#iv.vii-p35.1
 787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=41#iii.xcvi-p6.1
 788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=46#iii.xx-p36.1
 789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=46#iii.xxii-p37.1
 790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=25&scrV=46#iii.cxii-p25.1
 791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=33#iii.xii-p9.1
 792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=34#iii.lxvii-p10.1
 793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=34#iii.cxiv-p10.1
 794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=38#iii.lxi-p16.1
 795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=38#iii.liii-p9.1
 796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=39#iii.cxii-p8.1
 797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=39#iii.cxxiv-p17.1
 798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=41#iii.lxx-p15.1
 799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=57#iii.cxiv-p6.1
 800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=63#iii.cxvii-p7.1
 801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=66#iii.cxviii-p9.1
 802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=69#iii.lxvii-p10.1
 803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=69#iii.xciii-p8.1
 804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=26&scrV=69#iii.cvii-p17.1
 805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=4#iv.xv-p12.1
 806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=14#iii.cxvii-p7.1
 807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=34#iii.vii-p30.1
 808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=35#iii.cxix-p5.1
 809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=38#iii.cxviii-p14.1
 810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=39#iii.iv-p10.1
 811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=45#iii.cxviii-p6.1
 812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=48#iii.cxx-p18.1
 813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=51#iii.iv-p17.1
 814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=52#iii.cxxv-p10.1
 815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=27&scrV=54#iii.xxxii-p17.1
 816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=1#iii.cxxi-p21.1
 817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=9#iii.cxxii-p8.1
 818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#iii.vii-p25.1
 819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=19#iv.xiv-p12.1
 820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii.xxxvi-p16.1
 821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii.xxxix-p22.1
 822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii.li-p11.1
 823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii.li-p34.1
 824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii.lviii-p15.1
 825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii.lxv-p6.1
 826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii.xcv-p16.1
 827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii.cii-p25.1
 828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=20#iii.cvii-p6.1
 829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Matt&scrCh=28&scrV=28#iii.xlv-p23.1
 830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.v-p35.1
 831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.vii-p48.1
 832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.viii-p18.1
 833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iv.xiii-p10.1
 834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=1&scrV=32#iii.xcii-p24.1
 835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iii.cxiv-p17.1
 836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=5&scrV=41#iii.l-p9.1
 837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=6&scrV=56#iii.xcii-p26.1
 838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iii.xxviii-p23.1
 839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=10&scrV=33#iii.cxv-p14.1
 840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iii.lii-p16.1
 841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=12&scrV=28#iii.iii-p21.1
 842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iii.xcv-p4.1
 843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=22#iii.xiv-p33.1
 844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=13&scrV=27#iii.xi-p43.1
 845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=14&scrV=61#iii.cxvii-p7.1
 846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.cxvii-p7.1
 847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iii.cxix-p6.1
 848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=25#iii.cxvii-p19.1
 849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=25#iii.cxviii-p4.1
 850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=27#iii.cxviii-p14.1
 851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=33#iii.cxviii-p6.1
 852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=15&scrV=36#iii.cxx-p18.1
 853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Mark&scrCh=16&scrV=15#iv.vii-p10.1
 854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.l-p72.1
 855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.v-p16.1
 856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=34#iii.c-p40.1
 857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=35#iii.xxxiii-p12.1
 858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=41#iii.liii-p22.1
 859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=41#iii.cx-p13.1
 860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=67#iii.liii-p22.1
 861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=1&scrV=67#iii.cx-p13.1
 862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iii.xxxiii-p10.1
 863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iii.liii-p21.1
 864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iii.cx-p12.1
 865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=40#iii.lxxv-p19.1
 866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=51#iii.lxxix-p9.1
 867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=2&scrV=52#iii.lxxxiii-p16.1
 868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.cxiv-p24.1
 869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iii.v-p35.1
 870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iii.lxxv-p18.1
 871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iii.xvi-p36.1
 872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=4&scrV=30#iii.xii-p5.1
 873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=5&scrV=3#iii.cxxiii-p19.1
 874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=13#iii.lxix-p6.1
 875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.xx-p14.1
 876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=19#iii.c-p43.1
 877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=25#iii.xi-p4.1
 878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=27#iii.lxxxviii-p17.1
 879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=6&scrV=46#iii.lxxxvi-p4.1
 880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iii.xxii-p25.1
 881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iii.l-p10.1
 882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=36#iii.viii-p46.1
 883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=7&scrV=37#iii.l-p11.1
 884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=2#iii.l-p11.2
 885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=8#iii.xix-p17.1
 886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=8#iv.x-p46.1
 887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=32#iv.ix-p42.1
 888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=45#iii.xxvii-p12.1
 889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=46#iii.c-p39.1
 890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=8&scrV=54#iii.xxii-p26.1
 891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=12#iv.iv-p84.2
 892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=35#iii.c-p16.1
 893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=9&scrV=62#iii.cxxiii-p7.1
 894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iv.iv-p84.1
 895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=16#iii.xc-p7.1
 896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=17#iii.xiv-p35.1
 897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=20#iii.xlvi-p42.1
 898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=20#iv.v-p75.1
 899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.xlii-p52.1
 900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.xliv-p9.1
 901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=10&scrV=40#iii.xvi-p29.1
 902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iii.viii-p32.1
 903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iii.xi-p15.1
 904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iii.xlviii-p32.1
 905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iii.xliv-p38.1
 906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=13&scrV=21#iii.x-p47.1
 907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=14&scrV=11#iii.v-p22.1
 908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=4#iv.xi-p74.1
 909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=4#iii.viii-p52.1
 910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=22#iv.xi-p38.1
 911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=31#iii.ci-p12.1
 912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=31#iii.cviii-p5.1
 913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=15&scrV=32#iii.xx-p11.1
 914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iii.xlix-p29.1
 915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=22#iii.l-p27.1
 916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=24#iii.xlv-p26.1
 917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=16&scrV=27#iii.lvi-p13.1
 918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=3#iv.xv-p11.1
 919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=17&scrV=17#iii.xvi-p16.1
 920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=8#iii.xxxviii-p7.1
 921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=18&scrV=34#iii.xxxix-p17.1
 922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=8#iv.viii-p27.1
 923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iii.liv-p32.1
 924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iii.lvi-p24.1
 925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=10#iii.xc-p13.1
 926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=12#iii.xiv-p24.1
 927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=19&scrV=29#iii.lii-p16.1
 928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=2#iii.iii-p21.1
 929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=18#iii.v-p12.1
 930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=36#iii.xx-p18.1
 931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=36#iii.cviii-p6.1
 932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=36#iii.cxi-p25.1
 933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=20&scrV=37#iii.l-p38.1
 934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=12#iii.xcv-p4.1
 935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=21&scrV=18#iii.liii-p34.1
 936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=3#iii.lxiii-p8.1
 937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=19#iii.lxiii-p10.1
 938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=32#iii.liv-p22.1
 939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=33#iii.xii-p9.1
 940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=43#iii.xxxii-p37.1
 941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=51#iii.cxiii-p11.1
 942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=52#iii.cxv-p12.1
 943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=22&scrV=55#iii.lxvii-p10.1
 944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=1#iii.xxxvii-p23.1
 945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=7#iii.cxvii-p7.1
 946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=33#iii.cxviii-p14.1
 947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iii.xxxii-p24.1
 948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iii.vii-p12.1
 949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iii.liv-p36.1
 950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iii.xxxvii-p12.1
 951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iv.viii-p21.1
 952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iii.cxix-p7.1
 953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iv.iv-p66.1
 954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iv.x-p17.1
 955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iv.xi-p49.1
 956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=34#iv.xv-p7.1
 957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=42#iii.cx-p19.1
 958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=43#iii.xlvi-p53.1
 959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=43#iii.xlviii-p40.1
 960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=43#iii.li-p32.1
 961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=43#iii.cxii-p13.1
 962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=23&scrV=44#iii.cxviii-p6.1
 963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=13#iii.xxvi-p8.1
 964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=13#iv.v-p7.1
 965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=21#iii.civ-p6.1
 966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=39#iii.xxii-p32.1
 967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=39#iii.cxxii-p7.1
 968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#iii.xlix-p31.1
 969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=44#iii.lxv-p10.1
 970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=46#iv.xiii-p53.1
 971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=46#iv.vi-p42.1
 972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#iv.xiii-p54.1
 973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=47#iv.xiii-p67.1
 974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Luke&scrCh=24&scrV=49#iii.c-p41.1
 975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xxxix-p11.1
 976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xli-p13.1
 977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xliv-p52.1
 978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xlvi-p19.1
 979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xlvii-p13.1
 980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xlviii-p24.1
 981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xlviii-p39.1
 982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.vi-p14.1
 983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.vii-p31.1
 984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.lxxvii-p14.1
 985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.lxxix-p7.1
 986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.lxxxiii-p18.1
 987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xcix-p26.1
 988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.c-p24.1
 989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.cix-p10.1
 990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.iv-p8.1
 991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.ix-p73.1
 992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.xii-p48.1
 993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.xix-p3.1
 994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.vi-p11.1
 995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.xxii-p6.1
 996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.xxxix-p11.1
 997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.xlv-p13.1
 998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.v-p35.1
 999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.v-p29.1
1000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.iii-p15.1
1001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.xxxvi-p14.1
1002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.xlviii-p51.1
1003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.cxii-p17.1
1004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.xxxii-p9.1
1005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.ii-p22.1
1006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.viii-p16.1
1007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.xii-p18.1
1008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.xxiv-p11.1
1009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.c-p24.1
1010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.xxii-p6.1
1011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.xli-p20.1
1012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.lxxx-p12.1
1013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.xcvi-p25.1
1014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iv.viii-p48.1
1015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.liv-p23.1
1016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.lv-p9.1
1017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.lxxxvi-p13.1
1018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.viii-p6.1
1019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.xxiv-p19.1
1020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.xxii-p21.1
1021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.xli-p11.1
1022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.xlv-p6.1
1023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.xlviii-p24.1
1024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.xlviii-p39.1
1025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.l-p44.1
1026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.lx-p11.1
1027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.lxxix-p7.1
1028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.lxxxiii-p18.1
1029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.xcix-p26.1
1030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.cix-p10.1
1031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.xiii-p52.1
1032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iv.xiv-p8.1
1033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.ii-p24.1
1034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.xlviii-p12.1
1035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.cx-p14.1
1036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.iii-p18.1
1037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.vi-p37.1
1038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.ii-p47.1
1039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.xxxvi-p6.1
1040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.xxxiii-p11.1
1041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=27#iii.iii-p18.1
1042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#iii.vi-p30.1
1043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=29#iii.xlvii-p10.1
1044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=30#iii.ii-p23.1
1045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=32#iii.xcv-p13.1
1046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=33#iii.viii-p9.1
1047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=33#iii.xiv-p22.1
1048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=33#iv.x-p53.1
1049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=51#iii.lviii-p16.1
1050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.cxx-p4.1
1051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.xcii-p10.1
1052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.xlviii-p29.1
1053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.cxi-p13.1
1054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.xlviii-p29.1
1055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iii.cx-p8.1
1056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.cxxi-p16.1
1057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.vi-p10.1
1058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.xxxii-p25.1
1059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.xxviii-p9.1
1060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.cxii-p11.1
1061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.xlv-p45.1
1062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.lxxxviii-p9.1
1063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.xcvi-p26.1
1064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.cxi-p8.1
1065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iii.xliv-p23.1
1066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=26#iii.cx-p14.1
1067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.xx-p26.1
1068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.lviii-p23.1
1069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=34#iii.lxxv-p15.1
1070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.vi-p43.1
1071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iii.c-p37.1
1072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iii.cxxiii-p24.1
1073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iv.iv-p26.2
1074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iv.xiv-p7.1
1075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=34#iii.c-p21.1
1076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=39#iii.cx-p8.1
1077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=44#iii.xxv-p14.1
1078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.xxi-p5.1
1079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iii.xxi-p13.1
1080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.lxxii-p6.1
1081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.cxi-p12.1
1082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iii.lxxii-p6.1
1083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=21#iii.cxi-p12.1
1084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iii.xliv-p12.1
1085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iii.lv-p18.1
1086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iii.c-p7.1
1087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=26#iii.xlviii-p50.1
1088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=26#iii.lv-p23.1
1089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=26#iii.lxxi-p4.1
1090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=26#iii.c-p28.1
1091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=27#iii.c-p7.1
1092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iii.xliv-p24.1
1093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iii.l-p5.1
1094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=30#iii.c-p4.1
1095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=33#iii.xlix-p37.1
1096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=35#iii.iii-p16.1
1097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=35#iii.v-p9.1
1098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=35#iii.vi-p32.1
1099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=35#iii.xxxvi-p7.1
1100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=35#iii.xlix-p37.1
1101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=43#iii.lii-p12.1
1102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=44#iii.xciv-p11.1
1103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=45#iii.xxx-p17.1
1104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=46#iii.xxxi-p17.1
1105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=46#iii.xlv-p37.1
1106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=0#iv.iv-p84.2
1107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=29#iii.xxx-p11.1
1108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=39#iii.xlix-p18.11
1109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=41#iii.cxxiv-p5.1
1110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=44#iii.cxii-p7.1
1111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=45#iii.lxxviii-p7.1
1112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=45#iii.xcvii-p13.1
1113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=45#iii.xcix-p32.1
1114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=51#iii.xii-p16.1
1115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=54#iii.xii-p14.1
1116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=54#iii.xii-p20.1
1117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=54#iv.iv-p83.1
1118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=70#iii.lx-p4.1
1119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=71#iii.lxi-p5.1
1120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=16#iii.lv-p7.1
1121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=16#iii.c-p46.1
1122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=30#iii.l-p49.1
1123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=31#iii.cx-p8.1
1124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=37#iv.ix-p62.1
1125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#iii.liii-p20.1
1126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#iii.lxiv-p9.1
1127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=39#iv.xiv-p9.1
1128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iii.xxii-p28.1
1129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iii.xl-p13.1
1130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iii.xlv-p44.1
1131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=18#iii.cxvi-p17.1
1132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=18#iv.xiv-p10.1
1133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=20#iii.xxxix-p4.1
1134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#iii.xl-p4.1
1135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=25#iii.xl-p4.1
1136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=25#iii.xl-p19.2
1137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iii.lv-p5.1
1138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iii.xlii-p4.1
1139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iii.xlvi-p29.1
1140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=30#iii.cx-p8.1
1141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=31#iii.ix-p17.1
1142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=31#iv.vii-p12.1
1143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=32#iii.cix-p8.1
1144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii.iv-p45.1
1145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii.ix-p29.1
1146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii.xlv-p32.1
1147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=35#iii.lxxxvi-p12.1
1148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=35#iii.lxxxix-p7.1
1149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iii.iv-p23.1
1150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iii.vi-p4.1
1151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iii.ix-p14.1
1152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iii.xv-p5.1
1153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=44#iv.ix-p39.1
1154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#iii.iv-p20.1
1155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#iii.xliii-p8.1
1156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=58#iv.v-p30.1
1157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=7#iii.xcii-p11.1
1158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=39#iii.xxxiv-p4.1
1159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=39#iii.xlvi-p4.1
1160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=7#iii.xxi-p18.1
1161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#iii.cxxiv-p18.1
1162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#iii.xxxii-p35.1
1163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#iii.l-p75.1
1164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=16#iii.cxviii-p20.1
1165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iii.xii-p8.1
1166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iii.ix-p27.1
1167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iii.xxxviii-p17.1
1168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iii.xlii-p27.1
1169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iii.lxi-p8.1
1170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iii.lxxxv-p8.1
1171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iii.cxx-p20.1
1172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=18#iii.cxxiv-p18.1
1173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=28#iii.liii-p35.1
1174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.liv-p41.1
1175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.vi-p6.1
1176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.x-p22.1
1177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.xi-p41.1
1178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.xxx-p19.1
1179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.xxi-p11.1
1180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.xxxvii-p20.1
1181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.xlvi-p10.1
1182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.l-p45.1
1183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.lx-p8.1
1184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.lxxii-p5.1
1185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.lxxix-p5.1
1186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.xcviii-p16.1
1187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.c-p11.1
1188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.cviii-p11.1
1189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=30#iii.cxi-p4.1
1190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=34#iii.lv-p10.1
1191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=38#iii.xlvi-p10.1
1192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=39#iii.l-p13.1
1193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=42#iii.cx-p8.1
1194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iii.lxxiii-p10.1
1195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=33#iii.liii-p5.1
1196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=33#iii.lxi-p18.1
1197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=41#iii.xxii-p23.1
1198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=43#iii.xx-p13.1
1199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=48#iii.xciv-p18.1
1200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=50#iii.xciv-p18.1
1201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=2#iii.lii-p30.1
1202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=19#iii.xciv-p17.1
1203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=23#iii.liii-p36.1
1204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iii.lxi-p6.1
1205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=29#iii.lv-p22.1
1206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#iv.vii-p6.1
1207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=31#iii.xcvi-p28.1
1208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=42#iii.xciv-p10.1
1209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=43#iii.lv-p4.2
1210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=47#iii.xl-p14.1
1211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.lxii-p12.1
1212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=5#iii.lviii-p9.1
1213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=7#iii.lix-p4.1
1214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iii.lxxxiv-p4.1
1215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.lxi-p4.1
1216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.lxxxi-p12.1
1217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=11#iii.lxi-p4.1
1218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=16#iii.lxxii-p8.1
1219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=16#iii.lxxxix-p5.1
1220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=18#iii.lxi-p4.1
1221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#iv.viii-p7.1
1222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#iii.cxiv-p8.1
1223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=23#iii.cxx-p8.1
1224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=27#iii.lii-p31.1
1225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=29#iii.lii-p31.1
1226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=33#iii.xxxii-p26.1
1227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=33#iii.xxxix-p8.1
1228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iv.viii-p13.1
1229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iv.viii-p16.1
1230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iii.lxv-p13.2
1231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iii.lxxxiv-p9.1
1232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iii.xcviii-p17.1
1233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iv.iv-p64.1
1234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iv.iv-p71.1
1235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iv.iv-p89.1
1236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iv.ix-p28.1
1237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iv.xii-p61.1
1238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iv.xiii-p19.1
1239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iv.xiii-p23.1
1240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=36#iii.xxxii-p28.1
1241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=36#iii.lxv-p12.3
1242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=36#iii.xcv-p10.1
1243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=36#iii.xcvii-p6.1
1244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=37#iii.xlviii-p43.1
1245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=37#iii.cxiv-p9.1
1246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=37#iii.cxxiv-p8.1
1247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=38#iii.lxviii-p7.1
1248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=38#iii.cxiv-p26.1
1249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iii.lv-p14.1
1250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iii.vi-p5.1
1251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iii.ix-p13.1
1252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iii.xxiii-p23.1
1253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iii.xl-p17.1
1254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iii.xlvi-p20.1
1255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iv.vi-p33.1
1256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iii.cix-p7.1
1257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iii.cxii-p6.1
1258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iii.cxvi-p16.1
1259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=6#iv.xiii-p8.1
1260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=8#iii.xxxviii-p10.1
1261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=8#iii.cii-p21.1
1262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=8#iii.xv-p27.1
1263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#iii.xxx-p18.1
1264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#iii.xlix-p34.1
1265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=9#iv.vi-p18.1
1266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iii.xxi-p19.1
1267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iii.xxii-p45.1
1268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iii.cii-p21.1
1269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iii.cxii-p26.1
1270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=12#iii.xlv-p19.1
1271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iii.lxxvii-p12.1
1272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=17#iii.lxxviii-p3.2
1273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=19#iii.xx-p40.1
1274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii.xx-p39.1
1275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii.xxii-p39.1
1276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii.xli-p26.1
1277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii.lxxiii-p8.1
1278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=21#iii.cii-p17.1
1279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iii.xcv-p17.1
1280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iii.cxi-p15.1
1281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=25#iii.cv-p4.1
1282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#iii.xxiv-p32.1
1283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#iii.lxxxi-p9.1
1284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#iii.c-p12.1
1285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=28#iii.cviii-p12.1
1286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#iii.xcvi-p24.1
1287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#iii.iv-p35.1
1288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=30#iii.xlii-p26.1
1289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=4#iii.lxix-p20.1
1290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.xxxii-p22.1
1291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.liv-p33.1
1292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.xlv-p20.1
1293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.xlviii-p6.1
1294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.lxxiii-p4.1
1295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.lxxvi-p13.1
1296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=5#iii.lxxxvii-p21.1
1297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iii.lvi-p14.1
1298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iv.viii-p57.1
1299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iv.ix-p8.1
1300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iv.ix-p74.1
1301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iv.x-p13.1
1302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iv.x-p33.1
1303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#iii.lxxxix-p5.1
1304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#iii.xcvii-p4.1
1305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#iii.cvi-p16.1
1306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#iii.cvii-p11.1
1307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#iii.xxxix-p13.1
1308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#iii.lxxxix-p15.1
1309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#iii.xcvi-p4.1
1310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#iii.cvii-p14.1
1311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#iii.cix-p4.1
1312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=19#iii.cxvi-p10.1
1313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iii.xciv-p5.1
1314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iii.xciv-p19.1
1315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=22#iii.xcvi-p4.1
1316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=22#iv.ix-p31.1
1317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#iii.c-p45.1
1318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#iv.xiv-p11.1
1319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=27#iii.cx-p4.1
1320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=4#iii.xcv-p8.2
1321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#iii.xcv-p18.1
1322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iii.lxx-p5.1
1323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=10#iii.cii-p4.1
1324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#iii.liv-p19.1
1325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#iii.lxxxvii-p4.1
1326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#iii.cvi-p17.1
1327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#iii.xlvii-p15.1
1328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=15#iii.l-p21.1
1329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=15#iii.cviii-p7.1
1330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=23#iii.cviii-p14.1
1331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=25#iii.cvii-p10.1
1332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=25#iii.cxiv-p14.1
1333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=25#iii.civ-p3.2
1334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=31#iii.cvii-p16.1
1335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=32#iii.xxii-p44.1
1336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#iii.iv-p51.1
1337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#iii.xx-p37.1
1338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#iii.xxii-p41.1
1339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#iii.cii-p19.1
1340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=3#iii.cxii-p25.2
1341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iii.xliv-p42.1
1342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=4#iii.cvii-p4.2
1343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=5#iii.xliv-p28.1
1344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=10#iii.ci-p13.1
1345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=11#iii.cxi-p3.2
1346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=12#iii.cvii-p5.1
1347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=15#iii.cxvi-p8.1
1348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=16#iii.cxvi-p8.1
1349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#iii.xxxii-p27.1
1350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#iii.xlvi-p44.1
1351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#iii.lxv-p8.1
1352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=25#iii.xcvi-p5.1
1353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=4#iii.xii-p6.1
1354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=4#iii.xlviii-p27.1
1355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=6#iii.xxxii-p18.1
1356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=6#iii.xxix-p6.1
1357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=6#iii.xxxviii-p18.1
1358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=31#iii.cxvii-p22.1
1359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=6#iii.cxv-p10.1
1360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=6#iii.cxviii-p6.2
1361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=9#iii.cxvii-p7.1
1362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=14#iii.cxviii-p7.1
1363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=23#iii.cxvii-p23.1
1364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=25#iii.ix-p25.1
1365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=26#iii.cxiv-p8.1
1366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=27#iii.ix-p25.1
1367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=28#iii.xlviii-p44.1
1368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=28#iii.xxxii-p16.1
1369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=30#iv.xiv-p6.1
1370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=34#iv.xiv-p6.1
1371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=37#iii.xx-p30.1
1372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=37#iii.xxxvii-p28.1
1373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=37#iv.vii-p34.1
1374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=38#iii.cx-p7.1
1375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=15#iii.li-p24.2
1376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#iii.xxvii-p13.1
1377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=17#iv.vi-p17.1
1378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=19#iii.ii-p12.1
1379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#iii.xxxiii-p13.1
1380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#iii.lxxv-p11.1
1381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=22#iii.c-p38.1
1382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=24#iv.iv-p36.1
1383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=25#iv.iv-p20.1
1384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#iv.vi-p17.1
1385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#iii.cii-p16.1
1386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=27#iii.lxvii-p9.1
1387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#iii.xvii-p8.1
1388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#iii.xxv-p11.1
1389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#iii.lxxx-p4.1
1390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=29#iii.xcvi-p15.1
1391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=30#iii.l-p4.1
1392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#iii.xciii-p10.1
1393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#iv.viii-p19.1
1394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#iii.xlviii-p10.1
1395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=15#iv.viii-p55.1
1396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=18#iii.lii-p26.1
1397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=18#iii.liii-p10.1
1398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=20#iii.lxii-p8.1
1399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.li-p35.1
1400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.lxv-p4.1
1401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.cii-p24.1
1402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.xxii-p31.1
1403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.cxxiii-p29.1
1404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.cii-p13.1
1405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.xxvi-p9.1
1406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.xiii-p61.1
1407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.xcvi-p7.1
1408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.c-p42.1
1409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.li-p35.1
1410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.cii-p24.1
1411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.xcv-p11.1
1412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=10#iii.li-p35.1
1413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.xxxvii-p27.1
1414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.xli-p12.1
1415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.lxxvii-p10.1
1416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.cx-p11.1
1417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iv.v-p17.1
1418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.xxviii-p24.1
1419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.l-p23.1
1420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=1&scrV=26#iii.li-p26.1
1421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.vii-p40.1
1422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xl-p10.1
1423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xciv-p23.1
1424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=0#iii.xciii-p11.1
1425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.vii-p10.1
1426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.xlv-p16.1
1427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.v-p17.1
1428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.xciii-p5.1
1429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.cxxiii-p29.1
1430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii.c-p15.1
1431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.vii-p10.1
1432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.lxxv-p12.1
1433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.cx-p11.1
1434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iv.ix-p56.1
1435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.liii-p23.1
1436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.xlv-p16.1
1437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=31#iii.lxxxv-p9.1
1438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=37#iii.xli-p5.1
1439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=41#iii.xli-p5.1
1440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=2&scrV=41#iv.v-p9.1
1441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.xxxii-p23.1
1442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.xlv-p17.1
1443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.xli-p5.1
1444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=32#iii.xv-p20.1
1445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=32#iii.xix-p8.1
1446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=32#iii.xl-p10.1
1447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=4&scrV=32#iii.cxx-p12.1
1448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iii.xlv-p18.1
1449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iii.lxxii-p10.1
1450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.cx-p27.1
1451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=37#iii.xxv-p13.1
1452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=51#iii.vii-p11.1
1453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=56#iii.xcvi-p20.1
1454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=59#iv.viii-p23.1
1455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=59#iii.cii-p14.1
1456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=7&scrV=59#iv.xv-p8.1
1457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=5#iii.vii-p41.1
1458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=8&scrV=13#iii.xii-p32.1
1459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.vii-p39.1
1460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iii.xxxii-p30.1
1461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iii.xxix-p4.1
1462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iii.xxii-p15.1
1463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iii.lviii-p7.1
1464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iv.xiii-p18.1
1465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=9&scrV=4#iv.xiii-p59.1
1466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=10&scrV=20#iii.lxxviii-p9.1
1467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=26#iii.xcviii-p13.1
1468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=11&scrV=26#iii.cxiv-p11.1
1469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=12&scrV=2#iii.cxxv-p5.1
1470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=7#iv.xi-p15.1
1471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iv.xi-p15.1
1472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=9#iii.lxix-p19.1
1473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=15&scrV=9#iii.lxxxi-p14.1
1474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=16&scrV=25#iii.cxiv-p22.1
1475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=17&scrV=31#iii.cx-p25.1
1476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=3#iii.vi-p40.1
1477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Acts&scrCh=19&scrV=19#iii.ix-p19.1
1478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.cvi-p27.1
1479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.cvi-p28.1
1480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.ix-p22.1
1481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.xlix-p12.1
1482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iii.cxii-p10.1
1483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.ii-p11.1
1484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.iv-p27.1
1485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.xxiii-p15.1
1486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.xlvi-p51.1
1487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.li-p15.1
1488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iv.vii-p58.1
1489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.lxix-p16.1
1490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.xcvi-p16.1
1491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.xv-p7.1
1492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iv.xvii-p6.1
1493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.iii-p8.1
1494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iii.xcix-p29.1
1495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iv.ix-p44.1
1496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=1&scrV=25#iv.v-p67.1
1497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.xxxiv-p15.1
1498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.x-p48.1
1499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.lv-p21.1
1500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.xc-p10.1
1501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.ix-p80.1
1502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iii.li-p18.1
1503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=2&scrV=29#iii.cxviii-p25.1
1504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iii.xxvi-p32.1
1505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iii.lxx-p12.1
1506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.iv-p51.1
1507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iii.xviii-p11.1
1508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iii.l-p63.1
1509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=3&scrV=28#iii.xxvi-p27.1
1510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iii.lxxxiii-p5.1
1511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.iv-p26.1
1512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.liv-p31.1
1513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.xxx-p12.1
1514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.xx-p20.1
1515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.lv-p12.1
1516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.lxxiii-p11.1
1517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iii.cvi-p24.1
1518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iii.xii-p7.1
1519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iii.ix-p10.1
1520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iii.lxiii-p12.1
1521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=4&scrV=25#iv.v-p6.1
1522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xxxiii-p17.1
1523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.x-p21.1
1524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xviii-p18.1
1525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xxvii-p8.1
1526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xxviii-p13.1
1527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xl-p11.1
1528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.lxxv-p5.1
1529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xciii-p7.1
1530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xciv-p7.1
1531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xcv-p8.1
1532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xcvi-p9.1
1533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xcvii-p10.1
1534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.ciii-p20.1
1535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.ix-p47.1
1536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.ix-p52.1
1537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.ix-p58.1
1538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.x-p26.1
1539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iv.xi-p56.1
1540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.cxi-p24.1
1541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.cxi-p20.1
1542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.xii-p46.1
1543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii.xxxi-p14.1
1544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii.l-p31.1
1545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.x-p29.1
1546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.lxvii-p7.1
1547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.c-p10.1
1548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iii.l-p64.1
1549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.xxxiii-p19.1
1550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.xlvi-p43.1
1551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.lxv-p13.1
1552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.lxx-p14.1
1553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.cii-p10.1
1554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.xlii-p45.1
1555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.iv-p7.1
1556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=20#iii.xlii-p31.1
1557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=6&scrV=22#iii.xlii-p31.1
1558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=6#iii.xxviii-p4.1
1559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=6#iii.cxiii-p12.1
1560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=12#iii.xc-p12.1
1561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=13#iii.xlii-p39.1
1562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=13#iii.lxiii-p4.1
1563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=15#iii.xlii-p39.1
1564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=18#iii.xlii-p46.1
1565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=22#iii.xlii-p41.1
1566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=22#iii.lxxviii-p17.1
1567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iii.xxxv-p26.1
1568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=23#iii.xlii-p43.1
1569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=7&scrV=29#iii.xlvi-p34.1
1570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#iii.xlii-p21.1
1571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#iii.xliii-p4.1
1572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#iii.xcvi-p21.1
1573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=3#iii.cix-p12.1
1574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=7#iii.lxxv-p24.1
1575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iii.x-p18.1
1576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iii.xxviii-p14.1
1577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=9#iii.c-p35.1
1578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=10#iii.lxxvi-p12.1
1579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=11#iii.c-p35.1
1580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iii.lxxxvi-p10.1
1581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=23#iii.lxxxvii-p12.1
1582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=24#iv.vii-p46.1
1583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=24#iii.lxxxvii-p9.1
1584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=24#iii.cxxv-p16.1
1585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iii.vii-p5.1
1586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iv.ix-p46.1
1587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iii.cxvi-p18.1
1588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iii.cvi-p25.1
1589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=29#iii.xlix-p20.1
1590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=30#iii.lxix-p8.1
1591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=31#iii.cxiii-p14.1
1592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=32#iii.cv-p10.1
1593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=32#iii.cxiv-p5.1
1594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=32#iv.x-p34.1
1595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii.xxvi-p12.1
1596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii.lvii-p12.1
1597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii.lviii-p10.1
1598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=34#iii.lix-p18.1
1599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=8&scrV=35#iv.xii-p22.1
1600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=5#iv.iv-p25.1
1601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=7#iii.cxviii-p23.1
1602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=13#iii.xii-p34.1
1603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=14#iii.liv-p11.1
1604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=21#iii.lxxxviii-p12.1
1605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=9&scrV=23#iii.lxxxviii-p12.1
1606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#iii.xciv-p21.1
1607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#iii.liv-p37.1
1608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=2#iii.xciv-p14.1
1609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iii.xxvii-p6.1
1610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iii.liv-p28.1
1611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iii.lxxxii-p5.1
1612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=3#iii.xciv-p12.1
1613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.xxvi-p28.1
1614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.xxix-p30.1
1615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.lii-p36.1
1616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.lvi-p10.1
1617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=8#iii.cx-p24.1
1618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iii.xviii-p17.1
1619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iii.xxvii-p10.1
1620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iii.xxxvii-p8.1
1621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iii.lxx-p11.1
1622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=10#iii.lxxxi-p13.1
1623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=14#iii.lviii-p31.1
1624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=10&scrV=16#iii.xx-p33.1
1625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iii.xvi-p48.1
1626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iii.lxxxvii-p18.1
1627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=5#iii.lxxxviii-p13.1
1628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=7#iii.liv-p9.1
1629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iii.xliii-p11.1
1630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iii.xciv-p9.1
1631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iii.xciv-p22.1
1632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=17#iii.cxviii-p22.1
1633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=20#iii.lxxxvi-p11.1
1634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iii.lii-p21.1
1635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iii.xciv-p22.1
1636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#iii.liv-p12.1
1637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=11&scrV=33#iii.liii-p17.1
1638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=2#iii.xcvii-p21.1
1639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iii.liv-p25.1
1640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iii.lxxv-p20.1
1641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iii.cii-p26.1
1642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iii.cxii-p4.1
1643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.cvi-p8.1
1644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.cxvii-p10.1
1645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iii.vi-p26.1
1646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iii.lviii-p5.1
1647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iv.viii-p39.1
1648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.xxvii-p7.1
1649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.lxxxiv-p12.1
1650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iv.viii-p39.1
1651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iv.xiii-p29.1
1652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iii.xxxvi-p24.1
1653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=20#iii.lxxiv-p7.1
1654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=14&scrV=23#iii.lxxxvii-p19.1
1655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rom&scrCh=15&scrV=8#iii.xxxii-p33.1
1656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.xcix-p7.1
1657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.xcix-p16.1
1658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.xlviii-p15.1
1659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.vi-p16.1
1660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.xi-p30.1
1661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iv.v-p25.1
1662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.vi-p18.1
1663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.lxi-p11.1
1664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.viii-p41.1
1665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.xcix-p6.1
1666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.iv-p43.1
1667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.x-p48.1
1668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.xxii-p7.1
1669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.xxxix-p27.1
1670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=25#iii.ix-p21.1
1671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#iii.xxvii-p5.1
1672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#iii.lxxxix-p13.1
1673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=30#iii.xcix-p15.1
1674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=31#iii.liv-p26.1
1675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=31#iii.xv-p11.1
1676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=31#iii.lix-p11.1
1677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=31#iii.lxxxvi-p16.1
1678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.xcix-p13.1
1679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.xcviii-p21.1
1680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.xcix-p19.1
1681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.ciii-p15.1
1682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xviii-p9.1
1683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.ii-p15.1
1684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.xxxv-p15.1
1685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.xli-p25.1
1686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.vii-p37.1
1687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.vii-p44.1
1688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.xcviii-p5.1
1689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.x-p8.1
1690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.xxxiii-p8.1
1691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.lxxv-p10.1
1692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.lxxxvi-p15.1
1693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iii.xcviii-p21.1
1694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.ii-p8.1
1695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.xcviii-p21.1
1696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.xcix-p14.1
1697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.xxix-p31.1
1698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.ciii-p16.1
1699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.viii-p59.1
1700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.xcviii-p20.1
1701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.xcix-p4.1
1702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iii.ii-p16.1
1703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.lxxxi-p10.1
1704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.xcviii-p6.1
1705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.vi-p36.1
1706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.xi-p31.1
1707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.xiii-p22.1
1708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.vi-p72.1
1709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iii.liv-p7.1
1710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iii.xiv-p37.1
1711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iii.xxvii-p23.1
1712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iii.cxxv-p26.1
1713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.xvi-p45.1
1714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.lxix-p10.1
1715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iii.cxi-p16.1
1716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.ix-p13.1
1717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.xxxvi-p27.1
1718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.lxxviii-p11.1
1719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iii.xci-p6.1
1720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.xv-p10.1
1721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.xxviii-p17.1
1722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.l-p22.1
1723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.lxxxvi-p14.1
1724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.viii-p37.1
1725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.lvi-p11.1
1726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.cxviii-p8.1
1727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.cxxi-p13.1
1728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iii.xxix-p19.1
1729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iii.xv-p19.1
1730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=7#iv.xi-p41.1
1731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iv.xv-p4.1
1732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=7&scrV=40#iii.xxxviii-p6.1
1733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iii.xxviii-p11.1
1734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iv.v-p47.1
1735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=8&scrV=4#iii.ii-p35.1
1736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=7#iii.cxxiii-p12.1
1737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=9#iii.xi-p26.1
1738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=11#iii.cxxiii-p12.1
1739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=9&scrV=27#iii.lviii-p19.1
1740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.xii-p15.1
1741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.xxix-p29.1
1742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.xxvii-p32.1
1743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.xlvi-p26.1
1744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.xxix-p33.1
1745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.xviii-p28.1
1746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.xxiv-p5.1
1747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.lxiv-p11.1
1748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=4#iii.cxxv-p25.1
1749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=11#iii.xii-p27.1
1750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#iii.xci-p5.1
1751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=17#iii.xxvii-p34.1
1752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iii.xvi-p31.1
1753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iii.lviii-p30.1
1754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=27#iii.lxiii-p6.1
1755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iii.vii-p35.1
1756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iii.xxvii-p29.1
1757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iii.li-p27.1
1758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iii.lx-p5.1
1759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iv.v-p8.1
1760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iv.x-p29.1
1761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=30#iii.xxiii-p12.1
1762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=32#iii.xxiii-p12.1
1763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=32#iii.cxi-p7.1
1764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=3#iii.lxxv-p7.1
1765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iii.lxxv-p21.1
1766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.xxxiii-p16.1
1767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iii.xv-p24.1
1768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=11#iii.cxxiii-p28.1
1769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=25#iii.lxvi-p6.1
1770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=26#iv.vi-p26.1
1771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=26#iv.xiii-p16.1
1772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iii.xxii-p19.1
1773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=31#iii.cxix-p12.1
1774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.xiv-p30.1
1775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.viii-p11.1
1776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.x-p20.1
1777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.lxvi-p14.1
1778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.lxxvii-p6.1
1779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=2#iv.viii-p33.1
1780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=2#iii.vii-p52.1
1781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iv.ix-p14.1
1782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iv.xi-p43.1
1783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iv.viii-p45.1
1784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=7#iii.xcv-p7.1
1785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=8#iv.xii-p7.1
1786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=9#iii.xcvii-p17.1
1787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.lxxxvii-p7.1
1788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iii.xxxv-p22.1
1789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iii.lxxxvii-p7.1
1790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iii.xcvii-p17.1
1791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iii.cii-p20.1
1792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iii.ciii-p9.1
1793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=12#iii.cxxv-p29.1
1794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=13#iii.lxxxiv-p11.1
1795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=34#iii.xvi-p28.1
1796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=14&scrV=37#iii.xcix-p9.1
1797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=6#iii.cx-p10.1
1798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=8#iii.xcvi-p19.1
1799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=9#iv.xi-p16.1
1800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#iii.xv-p14.1
1801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#iii.xxiv-p9.1
1802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#iii.lxxiv-p11.1
1803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=10#iii.cxxiii-p10.1
1804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=11#iii.cx-p23.1
1805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=21#iii.xxxi-p13.1
1806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=21#iii.iv-p33.1
1807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=21#iii.lxvii-p8.1
1808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=21#iii.lxxvi-p8.1
1809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=23#iii.lxix-p11.1
1810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iii.xxvi-p5.1
1811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iii.xx-p35.1
1812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iv.vii-p19.1
1813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=26#iii.xxxv-p27.1
1814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=26#iii.xlii-p50.1
1815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#iii.lxvi-p8.1
1816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#iii.lxviii-p9.1
1817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=28#iii.lxxxiv-p15.1
1818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=41#iii.lxviii-p9.1
1819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=44#iv.xi-p39.1
1820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=53#iv.xi-p60.1
1821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=53#iii.xlii-p50.1
1822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=54#iii.xiii-p27.1
1823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=54#iii.ix-p6.1
1824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Cor&scrCh=15&scrV=57#iii.civ-p7.1
1825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iv.ix-p15.1
1826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=20#iii.xxix-p28.1
1827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iii.xcvii-p16.1
1828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iii.xcviii-p4.1
1829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.li-p20.1
1830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.lii-p4.1
1831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.xc-p4.1
1832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.l-p59.1
1833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.cxxiii-p23.1
1834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.x-p8.1
1835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.xxv-p8.1
1836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.xlix-p9.1
1837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.xlvi-p23.1
1838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii.lxxxvii-p13.1
1839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iii.lxviii-p12.1
1840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=4#iii.cxxiv-p16.1
1841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.vii-p6.1
1842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.xxxv-p11.1
1843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.lxxviii-p14.1
1844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.lxix-p17.1
1845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iv.vii-p56.1
1846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iii.lxxvi-p10.1
1847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iii.xxiii-p9.1
1848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iii.viii-p61.1
1849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iii.xlii-p51.1
1850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.xcv-p14.1
1851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.xcvi-p22.1
1852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.liii-p30.1
1853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.lxxxviii-p8.1
1854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.cxi-p9.1
1855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iii.xlii-p20.1
1856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iii.cv-p8.1
1857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=8#iii.xxx-p4.1
1858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iii.cxx-p11.1
1859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#iv.ix-p30.1
1860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=11#iv.xiii-p39.1
1861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iv.iv-p33.1
1862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=10&scrV=13#iii.x-p50.1
1863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=2#iii.xiv-p26.1
1864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=3#iii.ix-p9.1
1865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=29#iv.iv-p86.1
1866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=11&scrV=33#iii.xlvii-p26.1
1867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#iii.lxii-p11.1
1868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#iii.xcix-p33.1
1869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=2#iii.viii-p58.1
1870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=4#iii.xcix-p33.1
1871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iii.lix-p10.1
1872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iii.lxiii-p5.1
1873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=7#iv.ix-p34.1
1874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iii.lxxiv-p12.1
1875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=8#iii.viii-p34.1
1876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iv.viii-p24.1
1877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=12&scrV=15#iv.ix-p12.1
1878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iii.xlviii-p20.1
1879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iii.xc-p8.1
1880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=3#iii.xcvi-p8.1
1881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Cor&scrCh=13&scrV=4#iv.v-p38.1
1882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.cx-p18.1
1883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.xcix-p30.1
1884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.cx-p18.1
1885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=1&scrV=22#iv.xi-p12.1
1886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iii.cx-p22.1
1887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.cx-p22.1
1888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iii.xxiii-p25.1
1889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iii.xv-p15.1
1890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iii.lxiii-p14.1
1891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iii.lxxxv-p12.1
1892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iv.x-p35.1
1893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.vii-p26.1
1894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.xiii-p21.1
1895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.xliii-p10.1
1896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.cix-p15.1
1897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iii.xviii-p7.1
1898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iii.l-p60.1
1899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=28#iii.cxi-p6.1
1900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.xiii-p21.1
1901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.xliii-p10.1
1902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.cix-p15.1
1903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.cxviii-p24.1
1904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.xxxii-p13.1
1905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.xxix-p13.1
1906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.cv-p6.1
1907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.cxxv-p21.1
1908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.iv-p8.1
1909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.c-p33.1
1910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iii.xcix-p10.1
1911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iii.xix-p21.1
1912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=22#iii.xii-p28.1
1913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=22#iii.cxviii-p26.1
1914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=24#iii.cxiii-p13.1
1915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=4&scrV=30#iii.xii-p37.1
1916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.xxvi-p29.1
1917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.liv-p24.1
1918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.xxx-p13.1
1919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.xlvi-p50.1
1920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.lxxxiii-p10.1
1921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.lxxxvii-p11.1
1922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.xciii-p4.1
1923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv.xiii-p7.1
1924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iv.xiii-p13.1
1925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iii.xlii-p30.1
1926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.xxxv-p25.1
1927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=17#iii.xlii-p40.1
1928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=22#iii.lxxxviii-p6.1
1929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=5&scrV=24#iii.cxix-p20.1
1930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iii.xviii-p29.1
1931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iv.iv-p91.1
1932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=2#iv.xiii-p24.1
1933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iii.xi-p24.1
1934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=3#iii.ciii-p7.1
1935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=4#iv.ix-p16.1
1936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=9#iii.lxxiv-p15.1
1937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.liv-p45.1
1938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.xxxvii-p11.1
1939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.xliv-p31.1
1940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.xcix-p8.1
1941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Gal&scrCh=6&scrV=14#iii.cxviii-p12.1
1942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.xlvi-p35.1
1943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.lxix-p7.1
1944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.lxxxiv-p5.1
1945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.lxxxvii-p17.1
1946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.xcix-p11.1
1947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.cvi-p22.1
1948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iii.cxi-p18.1
1949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=14#iii.xxiii-p17.1
1950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.xix-p18.1
1951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii.xv-p29.1
1952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii.xlv-p4.1
1953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.cxii-p12.1
1954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iii.lxxxiii-p8.1
1955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.xvi-p47.1
1956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.xlviii-p21.1
1957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.x-p46.1
1958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.lxxviii-p12.1
1959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iii.xxi-p21.1
1960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.xi-p16.1
1961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.xlvi-p47.1
1962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.l-p47.1
1963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.v-p57.1
1964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.lviii-p18.1
1965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iii.xcvii-p22.1
1966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iii.cxix-p19.1
1967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iii.cxix-p13.1
1968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=3&scrV=31#iii.x-p26.1
1969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iii.xviii-p30.1
1970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.iv-p90.1
1971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.c-p34.1
1972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.xv-p23.1
1973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iii.xxii-p18.1
1974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=23#iii.xcvii-p20.1
1975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=4&scrV=27#iii.viii-p23.1
1976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii.c-p18.1
1977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii.cxiii-p15.1
1978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii.cxiv-p4.1
1979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.iii-p12.1
1980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.iv-p13.1
1981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xii-p12.1
1982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xxiii-p28.1
1983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xxxvi-p23.1
1984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.lxxx-p14.1
1985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xcvi-p27.1
1986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.cxi-p10.1
1987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.iv-p74.1
1988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iv.iv-p79.1
1989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii.xcvii-p19.1
1990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iii.xcvi-p14.1
1991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=14#iii.xxiv-p25.1
1992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=18#iii.l-p36.1
1993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iii.lxiii-p13.1
1994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iii.lxxxi-p16.1
1995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=25#iii.xvi-p7.1
1996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=26#iii.lvii-p16.1
1997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=27#iv.vii-p5.1
1998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=5&scrV=28#iii.iii-p32.1
1999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.lvi-p18.1
2000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iii.lxxx-p13.1
2001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iv.iv-p34.1
2002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Eph&scrCh=6&scrV=12#iv.xii-p13.1
2003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.cix-p6.1
2004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.vi-p46.1
2005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.xlvii-p24.1
2006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.li-p22.1
2007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.xii-p30.1
2008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.li-p22.1
2009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=21#iv.viii-p25.1
2010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.lxi-p14.1
2011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.cxxiv-p15.1
2012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.cxxv-p12.1
2013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iii.lviii-p17.1
2014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=23#iv.xii-p16.1
2015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.xlvii-p27.1
2016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.x-p28.1
2017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.xxiv-p20.1
2018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.xviii-p42.1
2019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.xx-p38.1
2020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.xxii-p36.1
2021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.vii-p32.1
2022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.lvi-p23.1
2023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.lxviii-p5.1
2024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.lxxix-p4.1
2025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.c-p9.1
2026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.xii-p50.1
2027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.xiii-p13.1
2028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.xlviii-p47.1
2029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii.liv-p42.1
2030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii.xxx-p20.1
2031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii.lxx-p10.1
2032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii.cv-p11.1
2033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xi-p39.1
2034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xxvii-p43.1
2035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xxxvii-p10.1
2036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xli-p6.1
2037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.lii-p13.1
2038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.c-p6.1
2039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.cxx-p16.1
2040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.lxxiii-p13.1
2041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.xlvii-p19.1
2042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.vii-p8.1
2043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.lii-p32.1
2044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.cxxiv-p11.1
2045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.x-p9.1
2046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iv.vii-p42.1
2047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.vi-p39.1
2048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.liv-p17.1
2049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.xlvi-p16.1
2050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.xcix-p28.1
2051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iii.iii-p25.1
2052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=20#iii.xiii-p19.1
2053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Phil&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iii.lxi-p9.1
2054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=12#iii.lxxx-p15.1
2055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.lvi-p8.1
2056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.cxvi-p11.1
2057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.cvi-p9.1
2058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=18#iii.xxvi-p12.1
2059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=1&scrV=24#iii.cix-p16.1
2060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iii.liv-p18.1
2061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.xlvii-p31.1
2062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.xcix-p22.1
2063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iii.lxxv-p16.1
2064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=14#iv.iv-p41.1
2065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=2&scrV=20#iii.xxiv-p26.1
2066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.xxxi-p15.1
2067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.lvii-p18.1
2068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.lviii-p6.1
2069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.cxii-p30.1
2070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iii.xxix-p36.1
2071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iii.lxvi-p9.1
2072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iii.xxix-p25.1
2073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.xii-p11.1
2074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.iv-p73.1
2075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.vi-p27.1
2076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.ix-p5.1
2077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.x-p15.1
2078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=11#iii.x-p45.1
2079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iii.lix-p20.1
2080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iii.cxix-p14.1
2081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Col&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.iv-p57.1
2082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iii.viii-p60.1
2083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv.xii-p5.1
2084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iii.cx-p26.1
2085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.xcix-p23.1
2086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iii.l-p25.1
2087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iii.xx-p16.1
2088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.liii-p25.1
2089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Thess&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xii-p13.1
2090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.vi-p22.2
2091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.xxx-p16.1
2092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.liii-p33.1
2093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.cxvi-p15.1
2094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Thess&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iii.cxxiii-p9.1
2095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iii.lxxxviii-p4.1
2096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.xiii-p27.1
2097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iii.cxxiv-p14.1
2098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.l-p58.1
2099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.iv-p29.1
2100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.xix-p6.1
2101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.xvii-p13.1
2102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.xviii-p22.1
2103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.xlii-p19.1
2104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.xlviii-p14.1
2105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.lxvii-p6.1
2106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.lxxv-p17.1
2107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.lxxxi-p4.1
2108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.lxxxiii-p12.1
2109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.cvi-p23.1
2110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iii.cxxv-p22.1
2111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.xix-p4.1
2112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iii.xlii-p38.1
2113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.lxxiii-p15.1
2114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iii.x-p5.1
2115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.lxxiv-p6.1
2116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=6#iii.xlviii-p33.1
2117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.cxx-p7.1
2118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=10#iii.lix-p14.1
2119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=15#iii.xxviii-p20.1
2120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.lxiii-p17.1
2121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iii.xlvii-p30.1
2122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=10#iv.xi-p27.1
2123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=17#iii.xxiii-p7.1
2124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Tim&scrCh=6&scrV=20#iii.xcviii-p18.1
2125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.cxvi-p19.1
2126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iii.xlix-p13.1
2127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iii.liv-p29.1
2128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.xcviii-p12.1
2129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii.xx-p27.1
2130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iii.xxiii-p32.1
2131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.vii-p21.1
2132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.xi-p34.1
2133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.xxviii-p26.1
2134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.xlvi-p13.1
2135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.xlvi-p33.1
2136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.xlix-p19.1
2137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.cxxiv-p13.1
2138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.v-p56.1
2139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iii.lxiv-p6.1
2140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iii.lxxxii-p6.1
2141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iii.xcviii-p11.1
2142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.iv-p30.1
2143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iii.cxii-p34.1
2144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Tim&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iv.xv-p10.1
2145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.xlii-p38.1
2146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.vi-p45.1
2147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iii.lxxv-p8.1
2148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=1&scrV=16#iv.ix-p72.1
2149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.xviii-p12.1
2150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Titus&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iii.lxxxvii-p8.1
2151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.x-p54.2
2152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iii.xlii-p34.1
2153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=5&scrV=12#iii.xcix-p18.1
2154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.xcix-p24.1
2155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=10&scrV=23#iv.vii-p13.1
2156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iii.lxxx-p7.1
2157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iii.xcvi-p16.1
2158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iii.cxii-p22.1
2159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iv.xi-p36.1
2160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=12&scrV=6#iv.xi-p51.1
2161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Heb&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iv.xi-p19.1
2162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=13#iii.xliv-p14.1
2163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.lviii-p21.1
2164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.vii-p47.1
2165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.xxiii-p19.1
2166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.lxxxiv-p13.1
2167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iv.xiii-p9.1
2168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.lviii-p34.1
2169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iii.lxxiv-p4.1
2170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.lxxx-p11.1
2171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iii.cii-p8.1
2172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iii.lv-p4.1
2173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Jas&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iii.lix-p19.1
2174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.lxxxvii-p10.1
2175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.viii-p57.1
2176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.liii-p39.1
2177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=17#iii.vii-p57.1
2178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.lii-p28.1
2179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.lxxxv-p6.1
2180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.lxxxix-p4.1
2181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.cvi-p13.1
2182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.cxxv-p28.1
2183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iii.xxii-p29.1
2184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iii.xxxi-p7.1
2185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iv.xii-p24.1
2186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iii.lxxxi-p15.1
2187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.viii-p17.1
2188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.iv-p48.1
2189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xi-p6.1
2190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xi-p33.1
2191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1Pet&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.viii-p20.1
2192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=17#iii.xxxvi-p25.1
2193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.xxiv-p10.1
2194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Pet&scrCh=2&scrV=4#iii.xcvi-p29.1
2195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=0#iv.xiii-p6.1
2196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iv.iv-p11.1
2197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.iv-p19.1
2198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=3#iv.iv-p35.1
2199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=4#iv.iv-p22.1
2200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.iv-p24.1
2201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.iv-p26.1
2202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p6.1
2203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=5#iv.ii-p5.1
2204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iv.iv-p32.1
2205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.iv-p38.1
2206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.xlii-p33.1
2207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.vii-p68.1
2208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.viii-p6.1
2209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iii.lvii-p11.1
2210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.iv-p45.1
2211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=8#iv.ix-p32.1
2212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iii.lvii-p14.1
2213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.iv-p47.1
2214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=9#iv.iv-p50.1
2215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.lxxv-p23.1
2216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.iv-p53.1
2217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.liii-p26.1
2218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.lxxxviii-p10.1
2219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iv.iv-p54.1
2220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=2#iv.viii-p49.1
2221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=3#iv.iv-p62.1
2222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.iv-p37.2
2223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.iv-p63.1
2224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=5#iv.iv-p65.1
2225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iii.lii-p33.1
2226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=6#iv.iv-p68.1
2227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=7#iv.iv-p70.1
2228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=8#iv.iv-p72.1
2229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=9#iv.iv-p76.1
2230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.iv-p81.1
2231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=10#iv.xi-p21.1
2232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.xxvi-p14.1
2233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.viii-p35.1
2234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iv.iv-p93.1
2235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.v-p23.1
2236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.ii-p6.1
2237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.v-p42.1
2238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=13#iv.v-p27.1
2239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.x-p17.1
2240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.v-p51.1
2241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.v-p58.1
2242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iii.lxxxviii-p16.1
2243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=15#iv.v-p80.1
2244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iii.lxxv-p25.1
2245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=16#iv.v-p62.1
2246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iii.xxiii-p20.1
2247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.vi-p24.1
2248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.vi-p24.2
2249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iii.lxxvii-p11.1
2250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iii.cii-p23.1
2251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.xlvi-p46.1
2252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iv.vi-p44.1
2253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=19#iii.lxii-p5.1
2254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=21#iv.vi-p32.1
2255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=22#iv.vi-p24.1
2256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=22#iv.vi-p38.1
2257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=22#iv.ii-p3.1
2258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iv.vi-p53.1
2259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=24#iv.vi-p57.1
2260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=25#iv.vi-p63.1
2261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=26#iv.vi-p64.1
2262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=27#iv.vi-p68.1
2263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=28#iv.iv-p37.5
2264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=29#iv.vii-p16.1
2265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=29#iv.ii-p6.2
2266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iv.vii-p23.1
2267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.liv-p40.1
2268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.xxxv-p23.1
2269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.xxxvi-p28.1
2270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.xli-p27.1
2271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.lxxvi-p11.1
2272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.lxxviii-p13.1
2273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.cii-p18.1
2274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.ciii-p11.1
2275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.cxii-p19.1
2276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iii.cxxv-p31.1
2277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=2#iv.xiii-p36.1
2278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.iv-p37.5
2279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=3#iv.ix-p38.1
2280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=4#iv.vii-p51.1
2281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=5#iv.vii-p53.1
2282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iv.vii-p54.1
2283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=7#iv.vii-p60.1
2284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.vii-p63.1
2285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=8#iv.ix-p38.1
2286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.viii-p5.1
2287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.viii-p10.1
2288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.viii-p36.1
2289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.iv-p37.5
2290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.viii-p38.1
2291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=10#iv.viii-p43.1
2292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=12#iv.viii-p44.1
2293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=13#iv.viii-p47.1
2294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=14#iv.viii-p51.1
2295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iii.vi-p47.1
2296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.viii-p52.1
2297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=15#iv.xii-p60.1
2298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.xlviii-p7.1
2299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.xlviii-p42.1
2300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.lxxxv-p4.1
2301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.viii-p54.1
2302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iv.ix-p9.1
2303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.viii-p59.1
2304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=17#iv.ix-p10.1
2305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iv.viii-p66.1
2306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=18#iv.ix-p5.1
2307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ix-p19.1
2308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.ix-p25.1
2309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iv.ix-p27.1
2310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv.ix-p49.1
2311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv.xi-p21.1
2312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=23#iv.ii-p6.3
2313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=24#iv.ix-p50.1
2314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=27#iv.vii-p9.1
2315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iv.ix-p60.1
2316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.xiii-p15.1
2317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=2#iv.ix-p69.1
2318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=3#iv.xiii-p43.1
2319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.x-p11.1
2320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=5#iv.x-p15.1
2321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=6#iv.x-p19.1
2322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.x-p20.1
2323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.x-p21.1
2324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=7#iv.x-p22.1
2325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iii.lxviii-p10.1
2326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=8#iv.xii-p56.1
2327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iv.x-p32.1
2328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=9#iv.x-p40.1
2329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=11#iv.x-p41.1
2330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.iv-p37.4
2331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.x-p43.1
2332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.xi-p54.1
2333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.iv-p37.1
2334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=13#iv.xi-p55.1
2335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=14#iv.xi-p58.1
2336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=15#iv.xi-p62.1
2337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iii.xviii-p25.1
2338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.xi-p71.1
2339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.xii-p6.1
2340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=16#iv.xii-p56.1
2341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.xii-p9.1
2342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iii.xliv-p16.1
2343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iii.xliv-p45.1
2344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iii.lxxxvi-p8.1
2345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iii.lxxxix-p8.1
2346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iii.xciii-p9.1
2347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iii.xcvi-p10.1
2348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.xii-p20.1
2349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=18#iv.xii-p23.1
2350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iii.lxxxiii-p11.1
2351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iii.ciii-p19.1
2352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=19#iv.xii-p45.1
2353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iii.xviii-p24.1
2354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iv.xii-p54.1
2355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iv.xiii-p17.1
2356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iv.xii-p59.1
2357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=20#iv.xiii-p5.1
2358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=0#iv.xiii-p6.1
2359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=7#iv.xiv-p2.1
2360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iv.xi-p68.1
2361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=16#iv.xv-p2.1
2362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iv.iv-p37.3
2363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iv.xvii-p2.1
2364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=8&scrV=24#iv.xi-p59.1
2365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2John&scrCh=1&scrV=7#iv.vi-p24.1
2366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.cxxiii-p27.1
2367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=3&scrV=16#iii.c-p19.1
2368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xiv-p15.1
2369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=5&scrV=5#iii.xlvii-p11.1
2370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=15#iii.xviii-p6.1
2371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=17&scrV=15#iv.ix-p64.1
2372. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Rev&scrCh=22&scrV=8#iii.xiv-p8.1
2373. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=2&scrV=11#iii.xxxvi-p12.1
2374. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Tob&scrCh=4&scrV=0#iii.xiv-p11.1
2375. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.xlvii-p7.1
2376. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=2#iii.xiii-p24.1
2377. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=1&scrV=11#iii.xlviii-p31.1
2378. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.lxii-p15.1
2379. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=6&scrV=16#iii.lxxxix-p16.1
2380. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=7&scrV=24#iii.cxii-p16.1
2381. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=7&scrV=26#iii.xxiii-p29.1
2382. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=7&scrV=26#iii.xxi-p30.1
2383. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=7&scrV=26#iii.xxii-p8.1
2384. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iii.xxii-p9.1
2385. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.xxiv-p17.1
2386. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.xxii-p4.1
2387. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.xxxvi-p29.1
2388. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iv.vi-p58.1
2389. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.lxx-p6.1
2390. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.xcvii-p15.1
2391. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=9&scrV=15#iii.cxxv-p15.1
2392. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=11&scrV=21#iii.ii-p38.1
2393. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Wis&scrCh=11&scrV=25#iii.cxi-p22.1
2394. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Macc&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iii.xii-p42.1
2395. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=2Macc&scrCh=7&scrV=0#iv.xi-p35.1
2396. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=1&scrV=28#iv.xii-p27.1
2397. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.viii-p22.1
2398. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=3&scrV=21#iii.liv-p15.1
2399. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iii.liv-p15.1
2400. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=5&scrV=8#iii.xxxiv-p18.1
2401. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=5&scrV=13#iii.xxi-p15.1
2402. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=6&scrV=36#iii.viii-p27.1
2403. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=10&scrV=14#iii.xxvi-p35.1
2404. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=10&scrV=15#iv.xi-p28.1
2405. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=18&scrV=7#iii.lxiv-p7.1
2406. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=18&scrV=30#iii.xlii-p48.1
2407. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Sir&scrCh=38&scrV=24#iii.lviii-p25.1
2408. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=Song&scrCh=5&scrV=2#iii.lviii-p2.1
2409. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iii.ii-p6.1
2410. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=6#iii.iii-p2.1
2411. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=15#iii.iv-p2.1
2412. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=19#iii.v-p2.1
2413. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=32#iii.vii-p2.1
2414. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=33#iii.vi-p2.1
2415. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=1&scrV=34#iii.viii-p2.1
2416. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.ix-p2.1
2417. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=1#iii.x-p2.1
2418. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iii.xi-p2.1
2419. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=2&scrV=23#iii.xii-p2.1
2420. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=1#iii.xii-p2.1
2421. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=6#iii.xiii-p2.1
2422. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=22#iii.xiv-p2.1
2423. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=3&scrV=29#iii.xv-p2.1
2424. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.xviii-p2.1
2425. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=1#iii.xvi-p2.1
2426. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=4&scrV=43#iii.xvii-p2.1
2427. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.xix-p2.1
2428. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.xxi-p2.1
2429. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.xx-p2.1
2430. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=19#iii.xxiv-p2.1
2431. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=20#iii.xxii-p2.1
2432. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=5&scrV=24#iii.xxiii-p2.1
2433. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=1#iii.xxv-p2.1
2434. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=15#iii.xxvi-p2.1
2435. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=41#iii.xxvii-p2.1
2436. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=6&scrV=60#iii.xxviii-p2.1
2437. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=1#iii.xxix-p2.1
2438. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=14#iii.xxx-p2.1
2439. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=19#iii.xxxi-p2.1
2440. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=25#iii.xxxii-p2.1
2441. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=37#iii.xxxiii-p2.1
2442. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=7&scrV=40#iii.xxxiv-p2.1
2443. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=1#iii.xxxiv-p2.1
2444. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=12#iii.xxxv-p2.1
2445. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=13#iii.xxxvi-p2.1
2446. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=15#iii.xxxvii-p2.1
2447. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=19#iii.xxxviii-p2.1
2448. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=21#iii.xxxix-p2.1
2449. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=26#iii.xl-p2.1
2450. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=28#iii.xli-p2.1
2451. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=31#iii.xlii-p2.1
2452. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=37#iii.xliii-p2.1
2453. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=8&scrV=48#iii.xliv-p2.1
2454. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=9&scrV=0#iii.xlv-p2.1
2455. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=1#iii.xlvi-p2.1
2456. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=11#iii.xlvii-p2.1
2457. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=14#iii.xlviii-p2.1
2458. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=10&scrV=22#iii.xlix-p2.1
2459. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=1#iii.l-p2.1
2460. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=11&scrV=55#iii.li-p2.1
2461. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=0#iii.li-p2.1
2462. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=12#iii.lii-p2.1
2463. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=27#iii.liii-p2.1
2464. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=37#iii.liv-p2.1
2465. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=12&scrV=44#iii.lv-p2.1
2466. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=1#iii.lvi-p2.1
2467. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=6#iii.lvii-p2.1
2468. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=6#iii.lviii-p2.1
2469. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.lxiv-p9.2
2470. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=10#iii.lix-p2.1
2471. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=16#iii.lx-p2.1
2472. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=21#iii.lxi-p2.1
2473. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=21#iii.lxii-p2.1
2474. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=26#iii.lxiii-p2.1
2475. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=31#iii.lxiv-p2.1
2476. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=33#iii.lxv-p2.1
2477. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=34#iii.lxvi-p2.1
2478. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=13&scrV=36#iii.lxvii-p2.1
2479. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iii.lxviii-p2.1
2480. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=1#iii.lxix-p2.1
2481. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=4#iii.lxx-p2.1
2482. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=7#iii.lxxi-p2.1
2483. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iii.lxxii-p2.1
2484. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iii.lxxiii-p2.1
2485. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=10#iii.lxxiv-p2.1
2486. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=15#iii.lxxv-p2.1
2487. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=18#iii.lxxvi-p2.1
2488. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=22#iii.lxxvii-p2.1
2489. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=25#iii.lxxviii-p2.1
2490. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=27#iii.lxxix-p2.1
2491. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=14&scrV=29#iii.lxxx-p2.1
2492. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=1#iii.lxxxi-p2.1
2493. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=4#iii.lxxxii-p2.1
2494. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=8#iii.lxxxiii-p2.1
2495. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=11#iii.lxxxiv-p2.1
2496. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=13#iii.lxxxv-p2.1
2497. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=14#iii.lxxxvi-p2.1
2498. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=15#iii.lxxxvii-p2.1
2499. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=17#iii.lxxxviii-p2.1
2500. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=20#iii.lxxxix-p2.1
2501. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=22#iii.xc-p2.1
2502. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=23#iii.xci-p2.1
2503. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=24#iii.xcii-p2.1
2504. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=15&scrV=26#iii.xciii-p2.1
2505. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=1#iii.xciv-p2.1
2506. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=4#iii.xcv-p2.1
2507. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=8#iii.xcvi-p2.1
2508. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#iii.xcvii-p2.1
2509. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#iii.xcviii-p2.1
2510. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=12#iii.xcix-p2.1
2511. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#iii.c-p2.1
2512. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=13#iii.ci-p2.1
2513. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=16#iii.cii-p2.1
2514. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=23#iii.ciii-p2.1
2515. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=16&scrV=29#iii.civ-p2.1
2516. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=1#iii.cv-p2.1
2517. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=1#iii.cvi-p2.1
2518. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=6#iii.cvii-p2.1
2519. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=9#iii.cviii-p2.1
2520. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=14#iii.cix-p2.1
2521. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=20#iii.cx-p2.1
2522. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=21#iii.cxi-p2.1
2523. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=17&scrV=24#iii.cxii-p2.1
2524. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=1#iii.cxiii-p2.1
2525. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=24#iii.cxiv-p2.1
2526. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=28#iii.cxv-p2.1
2527. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=18&scrV=33#iii.cxvi-p2.1
2528. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=1#iii.cxvii-p2.1
2529. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=17#iii.cxviii-p2.1
2530. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=23#iii.cxix-p2.1
2531. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=24#iii.cxx-p2.1
2532. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=19&scrV=31#iii.cxxi-p2.1
2533. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=1#iii.cxxi-p2.1
2534. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=10#iii.cxxii-p2.1
2535. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=20&scrV=30#iii.cxxiii-p2.1
2536. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=1#iii.cxxiii-p2.1
2537. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=12#iii.cxxiv-p2.1
2538. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=John&scrCh=21&scrV=19#iii.cxxv-p2.1
2539. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=1&scrV=1#iv.iv-p2.1
2540. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=12#iv.v-p2.1
2541. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=18#iv.vi-p2.1
2542. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=2&scrV=27#iv.vii-p2.1
2543. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=9#iv.viii-p2.1
2544. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=3&scrV=19#iv.ix-p2.1
2545. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=4#iv.x-p2.1
2546. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=12#iv.xi-p2.1
2547. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=4&scrV=17#iv.xii-p2.1
2548. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3?scrBook=1John&scrCh=5&scrV=1#iv.xiii-p2.1
2549. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-p23.1
2550. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p6.1
2551. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lii-p30.2
2552. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cii-p12.1
2553. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p76.10
2554. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.5
2555. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.8
2556. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xvii-p3.5
2557. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.17
2558. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-p4.8
2559. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p68.3
2560. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lvi-p16.1
2561. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ci-p5.2
2562. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ci-p5.4
2563. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.x-p23.2
2564. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p8.2
2565. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-p5.1
2566. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-p39.1
2567. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p6.3
2568. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p12.3
2569. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxix-p9.1
2570. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p24.1
2571. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cix-p9.1
2572. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cix-p10.2
2573. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p76.14
2574. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p76.11
2575. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-p4.4
2576. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-p4.2
2577. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p79.2
2578. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-p14.2
2579. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p5.2
2580. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p6.2
2581. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-p41.1
2582. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-p7.1
2583. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvii-p13.1
2584. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvii-p13.2
2585. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-p24.1
2586. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p8.4
2587. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p8.1
2588. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-p40.1
2589. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-p4.6
2590. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-p15.3
2591. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-p15.6
2592. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.x-p23.1
2593. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xii-p44.1
2594. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xiii-p21.1
2595. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xvii-p3.8
2596. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.2
2597. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-p22.1
2598. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxv-p4.1
2599. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxix-p26.2
2600. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxix-p27.2
2601. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-p43.3
2602. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.x-p54.1
2603. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p15.3
2604. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxv-p12.1
2605. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.4
2606. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxx-p8.2
2607. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-p24.1
2608. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxvii-p12.1
2609. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxvii-p13.1
2610. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxvii-p14.1
2611. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p6.2
2612. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p8.3
2613. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcvii-p11.2
2614. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xvii-p3.2
2615. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-p61.1
2616. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-p15.7
2617. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p8.3
2618. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxiv-p7.1
2619. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p17.1
2620. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p14.4
2621. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p15.4
2622. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p14.2
2623. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p15.2
2624. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-p4.5
2625. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.6
2626. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-p15.5
2627. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-p29.4
2628. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-p53.2
2629. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-p23.2
2630. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.x-p23.3
2631. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ii-p12.1
2632. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliii-p24.1
2633. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxix-p5.3
2634. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p27.2
2635. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p28.2
2636. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p18.6
2637. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p18.10
2638. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p30.3
2639. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p18.2
2640. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p18.4
2641. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p18.8
2642. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.10
2643. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.13
2644. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.16
2645. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p18.3
2646. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxix-p4.3
2647. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.viii-p47.2
2648. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxix-p4.4
2649. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlii-p7.1
2650. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-p21.2
2651. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-p29.2
2652. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-p7.1
2653. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxix-p4.5
2654. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcvii-p11.1
2655. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lx-p6.1
2656. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.viii-p9.1
2657. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xix-p4.2
2658. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.12
2659. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.9
2660. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.4
2661. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcii-p16.1
2662. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-p6.2
2663. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcii-p16.3
2664. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxii-p14.2
2665. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxii-p14.3
2666. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.11
2667. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.viii-p35.1
2668. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-p15.14
2669. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.6
2670. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.7
2671. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.15
2672. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxix-p5.4
2673. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.8
2674. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.10
2675. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p68.2
2676. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p15.1
2677. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-p4.1
2678. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.11
2679. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.16
2680. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxiii-p4.2
2681. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ci-p5.3
2682. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cv-p11.4
2683. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p10.1
2684. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cv-p11.5
2685. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p10.2
2686. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.3
2687. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p76.5
2688. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxiii-p4.1
2689. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxix-p4.2
2690. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cv-p11.2
2691. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxi-p5.3
2692. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxvi-p14.1
2693. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liii-p4.2
2694. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xvii-p3.6
2695. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p25.1
2696. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xv-p14.1
2697. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-p22.4
2698. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p43.1
2699. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.l-p66.1
2700. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p12.2
2701. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-p6.1
2702. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p76.15
2703. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.12
2704. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.13
2705. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.18
2706. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-p4.3
2707. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.x-p16.1
2708. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p18.5
2709. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p18.9
2710. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p18.12
2711. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-p18.7
2712. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.5
2713. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-p14.1
2714. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxix-p26.3
2715. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p76.8
2716. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p15.4
2717. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p15.2
2718. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-p29.1
2719. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cii-p5.1
2720. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cii-p5.2
2721. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p79.1
2722. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xvii-p3.3
2723. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xvii-p3.7
2724. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xvii-p3.4
2725. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liii-p32.3
2726. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liii-p32.2
2727. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-p22.3
2728. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xii-p7.2
2729. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p76.7
2730. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-p76.13
2731. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxvii-p18.1
2732. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxviii-p4.2
2733. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliv-p50.1
2734. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvi-p18.1
2735. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iii-p4.3
2736. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#ii-p7.2
2737. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iii-p4.4
2738. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxix-p26.4
2739. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxx-p8.4
2740. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxix-p5.5
2741. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxix-p28.1
2742. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xi-p38.2
2743. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-p30.1
2744. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxii-p14.4
2745. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xi-p38.3
2746. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xix-p4.4
2747. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcix-p21.2
2748. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-p67.2
2749. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-p67.1
2750. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcix-p21.1
2751. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xix-p4.1
2752. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.14
2753. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-p29.5
2754. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-p29.6
2755. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxx-p13.2
2756. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iii-p4.6
2757. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#ii-p7.3
2758. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iii-p4.5
2759. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iii-p5.1
2760. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcii-p16.2
2761. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-p43.2
2762. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxiv-p6.1
2763. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlviii-p35.1
2764. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liii-p4.1
2765. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lii-p7.3
2766. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxvi-p3.2
2767. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxii-p3.2
2768. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lv-p11.1
2769. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-p43.9
2770. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxvi-p3.3
2771. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lvi-p3.2
2772. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p14.5
2773. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p15.5
2774. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlviii-p8.2
2775. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ciii-p13.2
2776. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxx-p8.5
2777. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-p15.9
2778. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlii-p23.1
2779. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ci-p8.4
2780. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ci-p8.2
2781. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ciii-p13.3
2782. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lii-p7.4
2783. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxiv-p19.3
2784. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xli-p29.2
2785. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxiv-p19.2
2786. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxix-p5.2
2787. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlii-p23.2
2788. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxvii-p8.4
2789. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxvii-p8.3
2790. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p8.7
2791. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p8.9
2792. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-p5.2
2793. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxii-p27.2
2794. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxii-p28.2
2795. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-p5.4
2796. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-p5.5
2797. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxvii-p8.2
2798. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p8.8
2799. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p8.10
2800. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p8.11
2801. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-p15.8
2802. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxi-p5.1
2803. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p5.3
2804. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-p6.3
2805. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ci-p8.3
2806. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p8.4
2807. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p8.5
2808. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p8.6
2809. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-p8.2
2810. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cx-p21.2
2811. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxiv-p19.4
2812. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lii-p9.3
2813. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lii-p9.2
2814. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lii-p9.1
2815. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxi-p5.2
2816. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliv-p5.2
2817. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliv-p5.1
2818. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliv-p5.3
2819. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxiv-p14.2
2820. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxx-p8.3
2821. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ciii-p13.4
2822. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#i-Page_i
2823. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#ii-Page_iii
2824. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#ii-Page_iv
2825. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#ii-Page_v
2826. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.i-Page_1
2827. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ii-Page_7
2828. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ii-Page_8
2829. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ii-Page_9
2830. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ii-Page_10
2831. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ii-Page_11
2832. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ii-Page_12
2833. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ii-Page_13
2834. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iii-Page_14
2835. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iii-Page_15
2836. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iii-Page_16
2837. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iii-Page_17
2838. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iii-Page_18
2839. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iv-Page_19
2840. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iv-Page_20
2841. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iv-Page_21
2842. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iv-Page_22
2843. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iv-Page_23
2844. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iv-Page_24
2845. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.iv-Page_25
2846. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.v-Page_26
2847. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.v-Page_27
2848. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.v-Page_28
2849. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.v-Page_29
2850. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.v-Page_30
2851. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.v-Page_31
2852. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vi-Page_32
2853. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vi-Page_33
2854. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vi-Page_34
2855. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vi-Page_35
2856. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vi-Page_36
2857. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vi-Page_37
2858. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vi-Page_38
2859. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vi-Page_39
2860. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vii-Page_40
2861. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vii-Page_41
2862. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vii-Page_42
2863. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vii-Page_43
2864. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vii-Page_44
2865. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vii-Page_45
2866. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vii-Page_46
2867. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vii-Page_47
2868. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.vii-Page_48
2869. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.viii-Page_49
2870. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.viii-Page_50
2871. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.viii-Page_51
2872. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.viii-Page_52
2873. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.viii-Page_53
2874. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.viii-Page_54
2875. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.viii-Page_55
2876. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.viii-Page_56
2877. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.viii-Page_57
2878. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ix-Page_58
2879. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ix-Page_59
2880. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ix-Page_60
2881. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ix-Page_61
2882. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ix-Page_62
2883. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ix-Page_63
2884. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.x-Page_64
2885. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.x-Page_65
2886. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.x-Page_66
2887. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.x-Page_67
2888. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.x-Page_68
2889. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-Page_69
2890. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-Page_70
2891. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-Page_71
2892. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-Page_72
2893. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-Page_73
2894. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xi-Page_74
2895. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xii-Page_75
2896. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xii-Page_76
2897. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xii-Page_77
2898. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xii-Page_78
2899. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xii-Page_79
2900. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xii-Page_80
2901. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xii-Page_81
2902. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiii-Page_82
2903. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiii-Page_83
2904. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiii-Page_84
2905. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiii-Page_85
2906. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiii-Page_86
2907. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiv-Page_87
2908. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiv-Page_88
2909. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiv-Page_89
2910. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiv-Page_90
2911. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiv-Page_91
2912. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiv-Page_92
2913. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xiv-Page_93
2914. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xv-Page_94
2915. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xv-Page_95
2916. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xv-Page_96
2917. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xv-Page_97
2918. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xv-Page_98
2919. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xv-Page_99
2920. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvi-Page_100
2921. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvi-Page_101
2922. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvi-Page_102
2923. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvi-Page_103
2924. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvi-Page_104
2925. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvi-Page_105
2926. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvi-Page_106
2927. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvi-Page_107
2928. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvii-Page_108
2929. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvii-Page_109
2930. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xvii-Page_110
2931. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xviii-Page_111
2932. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xviii-Page_112
2933. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xviii-Page_113
2934. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xviii-Page_114
2935. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xviii-Page_115
2936. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xviii-Page_116
2937. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xix-Page_117
2938. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xix-Page_118
2939. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xix-Page_119
2940. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xix-Page_120
2941. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xix-Page_121
2942. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xix-Page_122
2943. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xx-Page_123
2944. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xx-Page_124
2945. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xx-Page_125
2946. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xx-Page_126
2947. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xx-Page_127
2948. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xx-Page_128
2949. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xx-Page_129
2950. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xx-Page_130
2951. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xx-Page_131
2952. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxi-Page_132
2953. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxi-Page_133
2954. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxi-Page_134
2955. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxi-Page_135
2956. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxi-Page_136
2957. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxi-Page_137
2958. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxii-Page_138
2959. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxii-Page_139
2960. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxii-Page_140
2961. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxii-Page_141
2962. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxii-Page_142
2963. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxii-Page_143
2964. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxii-Page_144
2965. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiii-Page_145
2966. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiii-Page_146
2967. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiii-Page_147
2968. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiii-Page_148
2969. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiii-Page_149
2970. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiii-Page_150
2971. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiv-Page_151
2972. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiv-Page_152
2973. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiv-Page_153
2974. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiv-Page_154
2975. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiv-Page_155
2976. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiv-Page_156
2977. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxiv-Page_157
2978. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxv-Page_158
2979. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxv-Page_159
2980. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxv-Page_160
2981. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvi-Page_161
2982. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvi-Page_162
2983. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvi-Page_163
2984. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvi-Page_164
2985. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvi-Page_165
2986. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvi-Page_166
2987. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvi-Page_167
2988. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvii-Page_168
2989. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvii-Page_169
2990. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvii-Page_170
2991. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvii-Page_171
2992. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvii-Page_172
2993. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvii-Page_173
2994. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxvii-Page_174
2995. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxviii-Page_175
2996. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxviii-Page_176
2997. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxviii-Page_177
2998. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxviii-Page_178
2999. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxix-Page_179
3000. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxix-Page_180
3001. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxix-Page_181
3002. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxix-Page_182
3003. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxix-Page_183
3004. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxx-Page_184
3005. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxx-Page_185
3006. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxx-Page_186
3007. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxi-Page_187
3008. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxi-Page_188
3009. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxii-Page_189
3010. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxii-Page_190
3011. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxii-Page_191
3012. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxii-Page_192
3013. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxii-Page_193
3014. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxiii-Page_194
3015. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxiii-Page_195
3016. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxiii-Page_196
3017. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxiv-Page_197
3018. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxiv-Page_198
3019. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxiv-Page_199
3020. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxiv-Page_200
3021. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxv-Page_201
3022. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxv-Page_202
3023. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxv-Page_203
3024. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxv-Page_204
3025. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxvi-Page_205
3026. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxvi-Page_206
3027. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxvi-Page_207
3028. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxvii-Page_208
3029. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxvii-Page_209
3030. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxvii-Page_210
3031. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxvii-Page_211
3032. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxvii-Page_212
3033. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxvii-Page_213
3034. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxviii-Page_214
3035. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxviii-Page_215
3036. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxviii-Page_216
3037. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxviii-Page_217
3038. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxix-Page_218
3039. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxix-Page_219
3040. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxix-Page_220
3041. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xxxix-Page_221
3042. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xl-Page_222
3043. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xl-Page_223
3044. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xl-Page_224
3045. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xli-Page_225
3046. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xli-Page_226
3047. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xli-Page_227
3048. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xli-Page_228
3049. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xli-Page_229
3050. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlii-Page_230
3051. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlii-Page_231
3052. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlii-Page_232
3053. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlii-Page_233
3054. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlii-Page_234
3055. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlii-Page_235
3056. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliii-Page_236
3057. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliii-Page_237
3058. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliii-Page_238
3059. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliii-Page_239
3060. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliii-Page_240
3061. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliv-Page_241
3062. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliv-Page_242
3063. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliv-Page_243
3064. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliv-Page_244
3065. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xliv-Page_245
3066. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlv-Page_246
3067. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlv-Page_247
3068. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlv-Page_248
3069. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlv-Page_249
3070. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvi-Page_250
3071. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvi-Page_251
3072. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvi-Page_252
3073. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvi-Page_253
3074. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvi-Page_254
3075. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvi-Page_255
3076. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvii-Page_256
3077. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvii-Page_257
3078. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvii-Page_258
3079. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlvii-Page_259
3080. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlviii-Page_260
3081. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlviii-Page_261
3082. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlviii-Page_262
3083. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlviii-Page_263
3084. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlviii-Page_264
3085. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlviii-Page_265
3086. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-Page_266
3087. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-Page_267
3088. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-Page_268
3089. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xlix-Page_269
3090. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.l-Page_270
3091. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.l-Page_271
3092. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.l-Page_272
3093. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.l-Page_273
3094. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.l-Page_274
3095. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.l-Page_275
3096. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.l-Page_276
3097. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.l-Page_277
3098. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.l-Page_278
3099. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-Page_279
3100. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-Page_280
3101. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-Page_281
3102. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-Page_282
3103. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.li-Page_283
3104. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lii-Page_284
3105. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lii-Page_285
3106. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lii-Page_286
3107. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lii-Page_287
3108. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liii-Page_288
3109. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liii-Page_289
3110. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liii-Page_290
3111. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liii-Page_291
3112. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liv-Page_292
3113. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liv-Page_293
3114. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liv-Page_294
3115. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.liv-Page_295
3116. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lv-Page_296
3117. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lv-Page_297
3118. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lv-Page_298
3119. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lv-Page_299
3120. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lvi-Page_300
3121. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lvi-Page_301
3122. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lvii-Page_302
3123. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lvii-Page_303
3124. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lviii-Page_303
3125. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lviii-Page_305
3126. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lix-Page_306
3127. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lix-Page_307
3128. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lx-Page_308
3129. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxi-Page_309
3130. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxi-Page_310
3131. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxii-Page_311
3132. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxii-Page_312
3133. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxiii-Page_313
3134. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxiii-Page_314
3135. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxiv-Page_315
3136. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxiv-Page_316
3137. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxv-Page_317
3138. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-Page_318
3139. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvi-Page_319
3140. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxvii-Page_320
3141. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxviii-Page_321
3142. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxviii-Page_322
3143. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxix-Page_323
3144. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxix-Page_324
3145. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxx-Page_325
3146. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxx-Page_326
3147. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxi-Page_327
3148. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxi-Page_328
3149. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxii-Page_329
3150. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-Page_330
3151. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiii-Page_331
3152. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiv-Page_332
3153. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxiv-Page_333
3154. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-Page_334
3155. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxv-Page_335
3156. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxvi-Page_336
3157. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxvii-Page_337
3158. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxvii-Page_338
3159. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxviii-Page_339
3160. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxviii-Page_340
3161. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxix-Page_341
3162. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxix-Page_342
3163. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxx-Page_343
3164. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxi-Page_344
3165. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxi-Page_345
3166. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxii-Page_346
3167. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxiii-Page_347
3168. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxiii-Page_348
3169. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxiv-Page_349
3170. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxv-Page_350
3171. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxv-Page_351
3172. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxvi-Page_352
3173. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxvii-Page_353
3174. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxvii-Page_354
3175. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxviii-Page_355
3176. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxix-Page_356
3177. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.lxxxix-Page_357
3178. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xc-Page_358
3179. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xc-Page_359
3180. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xci-Page_360
3181. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcii-Page_361
3182. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcii-Page_362
3183. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xciii-Page_363
3184. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xciii-Page_364
3185. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xciv-Page_365
3186. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xciv-Page_366
3187. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcv-Page_367
3188. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcv-Page_368
3189. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcvi-Page_369
3190. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcvi-Page_370
3191. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcvi-Page_371
3192. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcvii-Page_372
3193. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcvii-Page_373
3194. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-Page_374
3195. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-Page_375
3196. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcviii-Page_376
3197. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcix-Page_377
3198. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcix-Page_378
3199. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcix-Page_379
3200. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.xcix-Page_380
3201. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.c-Page_381
3202. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.c-Page_382
3203. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.c-Page_383
3204. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.c-Page_384
3205. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ci-Page_385
3206. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ci-Page_386
3207. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ci-Page_387
3208. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cii-Page_388
3209. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cii-Page_389
3210. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ciii-Page_390
3211. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.ciii-Page_391
3212. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.civ-Page_392
3213. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.civ-Page_393
3214. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cv-Page_394
3215. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cv-Page_395
3216. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-Page_396
3217. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-Page_397
3218. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvi-Page_398
3219. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvii-Page_399
3220. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvii-Page_400
3221. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvii-Page_401
3222. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cvii-Page_402
3223. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cviii-Page_403
3224. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cviii-Page_404
3225. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cix-Page_405
3226. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cx-Page_406
3227. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cx-Page_407
3228. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cx-Page_408
3229. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxi-Page_409
3230. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxi-Page_410
3231. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxi-Page_411
3232. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxi-Page_412
3233. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxii-Page_413
3234. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxii-Page_414
3235. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxii-Page_415
3236. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxiii-Page_416
3237. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxiii-Page_417
3238. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxiii-Page_418
3239. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxiv-Page_419
3240. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxiv-Page_420
3241. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxv-Page_421
3242. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxv-Page_422
3243. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxvi-Page_423
3244. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxvi-Page_424
3245. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxvi-Page_425
3246. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxvii-Page_426
3247. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxvii-Page_427
3248. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxviii-Page_428
3249. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxviii-Page_429
3250. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxviii-Page_430
3251. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxix-Page_431
3252. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxix-Page_432
3253. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxx-Page_433
3254. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxx-Page_434
3255. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxi-Page_435
3256. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxi-Page_436
3257. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxii-Page_437
3258. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxii-Page_438
3259. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxii-Page_439
3260. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxiii-Page_440
3261. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxiii-Page_441
3262. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxiii-Page_442
3263. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxiii-Page_443
3264. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxiv-Page_444
3265. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxiv-Page_445
3266. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxiv-Page_446
3267. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxiv-Page_447
3268. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxv-Page_448
3269. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxv-Page_449
3270. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxv-Page_450
3271. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxv-Page_451
3272. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iii.cxxv-Page_452
3273. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.i-Page_453
3274. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ii-Page_456
3275. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ii-Page_457
3276. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iii-Page_460
3277. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iii-Page_461
3278. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-Page_462
3279. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-Page_463
3280. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-Page_464
3281. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-Page_465
3282. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-Page_466
3283. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-Page_467
3284. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-Page_468
3285. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.iv-Page_469
3286. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-Page_470
3287. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-Page_471
3288. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-Page_472
3289. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-Page_473
3290. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-Page_474
3291. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.v-Page_475
3292. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-Page_476
3293. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-Page_477
3294. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-Page_478
3295. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-Page_479
3296. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-Page_480
3297. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vi-Page_481
3298. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-Page_482
3299. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-Page_483
3300. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-Page_484
3301. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-Page_485
3302. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-Page_486
3303. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.vii-Page_487
3304. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.viii-Page_488
3305. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.viii-Page_489
3306. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.viii-Page_490
3307. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.viii-Page_491
3308. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.viii-Page_492
3309. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.viii-Page_493
3310. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-Page_494
3311. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-Page_495
3312. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-Page_496
3313. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-Page_497
3314. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-Page_498
3315. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-Page_499
3316. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-Page_500
3317. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.ix-Page_501
3318. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.x-Page_502
3319. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.x-Page_503
3320. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.x-Page_504
3321. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.x-Page_505
3322. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xi-Page_506
3323. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xi-Page_507
3324. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xi-Page_508
3325. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xi-Page_509
3326. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xi-Page_510
3327. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xi-Page_511
3328. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xi-Page_512
3329. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xi-Page_513
3330. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xii-Page_514
3331. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xii-Page_515
3332. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xii-Page_516
3333. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xii-Page_517
3334. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xii-Page_518
3335. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xii-Page_519
3336. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xiii-Page_520
3337. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xiii-Page_521
3338. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xiii-Page_522
3339. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xiii-Page_523
3340. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xiii-Page_524
3341. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xiii-Page_525
3342. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xiii-Page_526
3343. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xiv-Page_527
3344. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xv-Page_528
3345. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#iv.xvii-Page_529
3346. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.i-Page_531
3347. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.ii-Page_533
3348. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_537
3349. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_538
3350. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_539
3351. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_540
3352. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_541
3353. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_542
3354. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_543
3355. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_544
3356. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_545
3357. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_546
3358. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iii-Page_547
3359. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_548
3360. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_549
3361. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_550
3362. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_551
3363. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_552
3364. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_553
3365. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_554
3366. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_555
3367. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_556
3368. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_557
3369. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_558
3370. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_559
3371. file:///ccel/s/schaff/npnf107/cache/npnf107.html3#v.iv-Page_560
