# source: Fathers/English/ANF/Volume II.   Fathers of the Second Century
# series: ANF
# volume: Volume II.
# father: clement_alexandria
# work: Exhortation to the Heathen
# latin_match_candidate: (none)
# extracted: 2026-09-01
# note: Public-domain Schaff English extract. Volume archives retained under ANF/NPNF1/NPNF2.
Exhortation to the Heathen
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter I.--Exhortation to Abandon the Impious Mysteries of Idolatry for
      the Adoration of the Divine Word and God the Father.

   Amphion of Thebes and Arion of Methymna were both minstrels, and both
   were renowned in story. They are celebrated in song to this day in the
   chorus of the Greeks; the one for having allured the fishes, and the
   other for having surrounded Thebes with walls by the power of music.
   Another, a Thracian, a cunning master of his art (he also is the
   subject of a Hellenic legend), tamed the wild beasts by the mere might
   of song; and transplanted trees--oaks--by music. I might tell you also
   the story of another, a brother to these--the subject of a myth, and a
   minstrel--Eunomos the Locrian and the Pythic grasshopper. A solemn
   Hellenic assembly had met at Pytho, to celebrate the death of the
   Pythic serpent, when Eunomos sang the reptile's epitaph. Whether his
   ode was a hymn in praise of the serpent, or a dirge, I am not able to
   say. But there was a contest, and Eunomos was playing the lyre in the
   summer time: it was when the grasshoppers, warmed by the sun, were
   chirping beneath the leaves along the hills; but they were singing not
   to that dead dragon, but to God All-wise,--a lay unfettered by rule,
   better than the numbers of Eunomos. The Locrian breaks a string. The
   grasshopper sprang on the neck of the instrument, and sang on it as on
   a branch; and the minstrel, adapting his strain to the grasshopper's
   song, made up for the want of the missing string. The grasshopper then
   was attracted by the song of Eunomos, as the fable represents,
   according to which also a brazen statue of Eunomos with his lyre, and
   the Locrian's ally in the contest, was erected at Pytho. But of its own
   accord it flew to the lyre, and of its own accord sang, and was
   regarded by the Greeks as a musical performer.

   How, let me ask, have you believed vain fables and supposed animals to
   be charmed by music; while Truth's shining face alone, as would seem,
   appears to you disguised, and is looked on with incredulous eyes? And
   so Cithæron, and Helicon, and the mountains of the Odrysi, and the
   initiatory rites of the Thracians, mysteries of deceit, are hallowed
   and celebrated in hymns. For me, I am pained at such calamities as form
   the subjects of tragedy, though but myths; but by you the records of
   miseries are turned into dramatic compositions.

   But the dramas and the raving poets, now quite intoxicated, let us
   crown with ivy; and distracted outright as they are, in Bacchic
   fashion, with the satyrs, and the frenzied rabble, and the rest of the
   demon crew, let us confine to Cithæron and Helicon, now antiquated.

   But let us bring from above out of heaven, Truth, with Wisdom in all
   its brightness, and the sacred prophetic choir, down to the holy mount
   of God; and let Truth, darting her light to the most distant points,
   cast her rays all around on those that are involved in darkness, and
   deliver men from delusion, stretching out her very strong [857] right
   hand, which is wisdom, for their salvation. And raising their eyes, and
   looking above, let them abandon Helicon and Cithæron, and take up their
   abode in Sion. "For out of Sion shall go forth the law, and the word of
   the Lord from Jerusalem," [858] --the celestial Word, the true athlete
   crowned in the theatre of the whole universe. What my Eunomos sings is
   not the measure of Terpander, nor that of Capito, nor the Phrygian, nor
   Lydian, nor Dorian, but the immortal measure of the new harmony which
   bears God's name--the new, the Levitical song. [859]


   "Soother of pain, calmer of wrath, producing forgetfulness of all
   ills." [860]

   Sweet and true is the charm of persuasion which blends with this
   strain.

   To me, therefore, that Thracian Orpheus, that Theban, and that
   Methymnæan,--men, and yet unworthy of the name,--seem to have been
   deceivers, who, under the pretence of poetry corrupting human life,
   possessed by a spirit of artful sorcery for purposes of destruction,
   celebrating crimes in their orgies, and making human woes the materials
   of religious worship, were the first to entice men to idols; nay, to
   build up the stupidity of the nations with blocks of wood and
   stone,--that is, statues and images,--subjecting to the yoke of
   extremest bondage the truly noble freedom of those who lived as free
   citizens under heaven by their songs and incantations. But not such is
   my song, which has come to loose, and that speedily, the bitter bondage
   of tyrannizing demons; and leading us back to the mild and loving yoke
   of piety, recalls to heaven those that had been cast prostrate to the
   earth. It alone has tamed men, the most intractable of animals; the
   frivolous among them answering to the fowls of the air, deceivers to
   reptiles, the irascible to lions, the voluptuous to swine, the
   rapacious to wolves. The silly are stocks and stones, and still more
   senseless than stones is a man who is steeped in ignorance. As our
   witness, let us adduce the voice of prophecy accordant with truth, and
   bewailing those who are crushed in ignorance and folly: "For God is
   able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham;" [861] and He,
   commiserating their great ignorance and hardness of heart who are
   petrified against the truth, has raised up a seed of piety, sensitive
   to virtue, of those stones--of the nations, that is, who trusted in
   stones. Again, therefore, some venomous and false hypocrites, who
   plotted against righteousness, He once called "a brood of vipers."
   [862] But if one of those serpents even is willing to repent, and
   follows the Word, he becomes a man of God.

   Others he figuratively calls wolves, clothed in sheep-skins, meaning
   thereby monsters of rapacity in human form. And so all such most savage
   beasts, and all such blocks of stone, the celestial song has
   transformed into tractable men. "For even we ourselves were sometime
   foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures,
   living in malice and envy, hateful, hating one another." Thus speaks
   the apostolic Scripture: "But after that the kindness and love of God
   our saviour to man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we
   have done, but according to His mercy, He saved us." [863] Behold the
   might of the new song! It has made men out of stones, men out of
   beasts. Those, moreover, that were as dead, not being partakers of the
   true life, have come to life again, simply by becoming listeners to
   this song. It also composed the universe into melodious order, and
   tuned the discord of the elements to harmonious arrangement, so that
   the whole world might become harmony. It let loose the fluid ocean, and
   yet has prevented it from encroaching on the land. The earth, again,
   which had been in a state of commotion, it has established, and fixed
   the sea as its boundary. The violence of fire it has softened by the
   atmosphere, as the Dorian is blended with the Lydian strain; and the
   harsh cold of the air it has moderated by the embrace of fire,
   harmoniously arranging these the extreme tones of the universe. And
   this deathless strain,--the support of the whole and the harmony of
   all,--reaching from the centre to the circumference, and from the
   extremities to the central part, has harmonized this universal frame of
   things, not according to the Thracian music, which is like that
   invented by Jubal, but according to the paternal counsel of God, which
   fired the zeal of David. And He who is of David, and yet before him,
   the Word of God, despising the lyre and harp, which are but lifeless
   instruments, and having tuned by the Holy Spirit the universe, and
   especially man,--who, composed of body and soul, is a universe in
   miniature,--makes melody to God on this instrument of many tones; and
   to this instrument--I mean man--he sings accordant: "For thou art my
   harp, and pipe, and temple." [864] --a harp for harmony--a pipe by
   reason of the Spirit--a temple by reason of the word; so that the first
   may sound, the second breathe, the third contain the Lord. And David
   the king, the harper whom we mentioned a little above, who exhorted to
   the truth and dissuaded from idols, was so far from celebrating demons
   in song, that in reality they were driven away by his music. Thus, when
   Saul was plagued with a demon, he cured him by merely playing. A
   beautiful breathing instrument of music the Lord made man, after His
   own image. And He Himself also, surely, who is the supramundane Wisdom,
   the celestial Word, is the all-harmonious, melodious, holy instrument
   of God. What, then, does this instrument--the Word of God, the Lord,
   the New Song--desire? To open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the
   ears of the deaf, and to lead the lame or the erring to righteousness,
   to exhibit God to the foolish, to put a stop to corruption, to conquer
   death, to reconcile disobedient children to their father. The
   instrument of God loves mankind. The Lord pities, instructs, exhorts,
   admonishes, saves, shields, and of His bounty promises us the kingdom
   of heaven as a reward for learning; and the only advantage He reaps is,
   that we are saved. For wickedness feeds on men's destruction; but
   truth, like the bee, harming nothing, delights only in the salvation of
   men.

   You have, then, God's promise; you have His love: become partaker of
   His grace. And do not suppose the song of salvation to be new, as a
   vessel or a house is new. For "before the morning star it was;" [865]
   and "in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
   Word was God." [866] Error seems old, but truth seems a new thing.

   Whether, then, the Phrygians are shown to be the most ancient people by
   the goats of the fable; or, on the other hand, the Arcadians by the
   poets, who describe them as older than the moon; or, finally, the
   Egyptians by those who dream that this land first gave birth to gods
   and men: yet none of these at least existed before the world. But
   before the foundation of the world were we, who, because destined to be
   in Him, pre-existed in the eye of God before,--we the rational
   creatures of the Word of God, on whose account we date from the
   beginning; for "in the beginning was the Word." Well, inasmuch as the
   Word was from the first, He was and is the divine source of all things;
   but inasmuch as He has now assumed the name Christ, consecrated of old,
   and worthy of power, he has been called by me the New Song. This Word,
   then, the Christ, the cause of both our being at first (for He was in
   God) and of our well-being, this very Word has now appeared as man, He
   alone being both, both God and man--the Author of all blessings to us;
   by whom we, being taught to live well, are sent on our way to life
   eternal. For, according to that inspired apostle of the Lord, "the
   grace of God which bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men,
   teaching us, that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
   live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; looking
   for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the great God and
   our Saviour Jesus Christ." [867]

   This is the New Song, [868] the manifestation of the Word that was in
   the beginning, and before the beginning. The Saviour, who existed
   before, has in recent days appeared. He, who is in Him that truly is,
   has appeared; for the Word, who "was with God," and by whom all things
   were created, has appeared as our Teacher. The Word, who in the
   beginning bestowed on us life as Creator when He formed us, taught us
   to live well when He appeared as our Teacher; that as God He might
   afterwards conduct us to the life which never ends. He did not now for
   the first time pity us for our error; but He pitied us from the first,
   from the beginning. But now, at His appearance, lost as we already
   were, He accomplished our salvation. For that wicked reptile monster,
   by his enchantments, enslaves and plagues men even till now;
   inflicting, as seems to me, such barbarous vengeance on them as those
   who are said to bind the captives to corpses till they rot together.
   This wicked tyrant and serpent, accordingly, binding fast with the
   miserable chain of superstition whomsoever he can draw to his side from
   their birth, to stones, and stocks, and images, and such like idols,
   may with truth be said to have taken and buried living men with those
   dead idols, till both suffer corruption together.

   Therefore (for the seducer is one and the same) he that at the
   beginning brought Eve down to death, now brings thither the rest of
   mankind. Our ally and helper, too, is one and the same--the Lord, who
   from the beginning gave revelations by prophecy, but now plainly calls
   to salvation. In obedience to the apostolic injunction, therefore, let
   us flee from "the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now
   worketh in the children of disobedience," [869] and let us run to the
   Lord the saviour, who now exhorts to salvation, as He has ever done, as
   He did by signs and wonders in Egypt and the desert, both by the bush
   and the cloud, which, through the favour of divine love, attended the
   Hebrews like a handmaid. By the fear which these inspired He addressed
   the hard-hearted; while by Moses, learned in all wisdom, and Isaiah,
   lover of truth, and the whole prophetic choir, in a way appealing more
   to reason, He turns to the Word those who have ears to hear. Sometimes
   He upbraids, and sometimes He threatens. Some men He mourns over,
   others He addresses with the voice of song, just as a good physician
   treats some of his patients with cataplasms, some with rubbing, some
   with fomentations; in one case cuts open with the lancet, in another
   cauterizes, in another amputates, in order if possible to cure the
   patient's diseased part or member. The Saviour has many tones of voice,
   and many methods for the salvation of men; by threatening He
   admonishes, by upbraiding He converts, by bewailing He pities, by the
   voice of song He cheers. He spake by the burning bush, for the men of
   that day needed signs and wonders.

   He awed men by the fire when He made flame to burst from the pillar of
   cloud--a token at once of grace and fear: if you obey, there is the
   light; if you disobey, there is the fire; but since humanity is nobler
   than the pillar or the bush, after them the prophets uttered their
   voice,--the Lord Himself speaking in Isaiah, in Elias,--speaking
   Himself by the mouth of the prophets. But if thou dost not believe the
   prophets, but supposest both the men and the fire a myth, the Lord
   Himself shall speak to thee, "who, being in the form of God, thought it
   not robbery to be equal with God, but humbled Himself," [870] --He, the
   merciful God, exerting Himself to save man. And now the Word Himself
   clearly speaks to thee, shaming thy unbelief; yea, I say, the Word of
   God became man, that thou mayest learn from man how man may become God.
   Is it not then monstrous, my friends, that while God is ceaselessly
   exhorting us to virtue, we should spurn His kindness and reject
   salvation?

   Does not John also invite to salvation, and is he not entirely a voice
   of exhortation? Let us then ask him, "Who of men art thou, and whence?"
   He will not say Elias. He will deny that he is Christ, but will profess
   himself to be "a voice crying in the wilderness." Who, then, is John?
   [871] In a word, we may say, "The beseeching voice of the Word crying
   in the wilderness." What criest thou, O voice? Tell us also. "Make
   straight the paths of the Lord." [872] John is the forerunner, and that
   voice the precursor of the Word; an inviting voice, preparing for
   salvation,--a voice urging men on to the inheritance of the heavens,
   and through which the barren and the desolate is childless no more.
   This fecundity the angel's voice foretold; and this voice was also the
   precursor of the Lord preaching glad tidings to the barren woman, as
   John did to the wilderness. By reason of this voice of the Word,
   therefore, the barren woman bears children, and the desert becomes
   fruitful. The two voices which heralded the Lord's--that of the angel
   and that of John--intimate, as I think, the salvation in store for us
   to be, that on the appearance of this Word we should reap, as the fruit
   of this productiveness, eternal life. The Scripture makes this all
   clear, by referring both the voices to the same thing: "Let her hear
   who has not brought forth, and let her who has not had the pangs of
   childbirth utter her voice: for more are the children of the desolate,
   than of her who hath an husband." [873]

   The angel announced to us the glad tidings of a husband. John entreated
   us to recognise the husbandman, to seek the husband. For this husband
   of the barren woman, and this husbandman of the desert--who filled with
   divine power the barren woman and the desert--is one and the same. For
   because many were the children of the mother of noble rule, yet the
   Hebrew woman, once blessed with many children, was made childless
   because of unbelief: the barren woman receives the husband, and the
   desert the husbandman; then both become mothers through the word, the
   one of fruits, the other of believers. But to the unbelieving the
   barren and the desert are still reserved. For this reason John, the
   herald of the Word, besought men to make themselves ready against the
   coming of the Christ of God. [874] And it was this which was signified
   by the dumbness of Zacharias, which waited for fruit in the person of
   the harbinger of Christ, that the Word, the light of truth, by becoming
   the Gospel, might break the mystic silence of the prophetic enigmas.
   But if thou desirest truly to see God, take to thyself means of
   purification worthy of Him, not leaves of laurel fillets interwoven
   with wool and purple; but wreathing thy brows with righteousness, and
   encircling them with the leaves of temperance, set thyself earnestly to
   find Christ. "For I am," He says, "the door," [875] which we who desire
   to understand God must discover, that He may throw heaven's gates wide
   open to us. For the gates of the Word being intellectual, are opened by
   the key of faith. No one knows God but the Son, and he to whom the Son
   shall reveal Him. [876] And I know well that He who has opened the door
   hitherto shut, will afterwards reveal what is within; and will show
   what we could not have known before, had we not entered in by Christ,
   through whom alone God is beheld.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [857] The Greek is hupertaten, lit. highest. Potter appeals to the use
   of huerteros in Sophocles, Electr. 455, in the sense of stronger, as
   giving a clue to the meaning here. The scholiast in Klotz takes the
   words to mean that the hand is held over them.

   [858] Isa. ii. 3.

   [859] Ps. xcvi. 1, xvciii. 1.

   [860] Odyssey, iv. 220.

   [861] Matt. iii. 9; Luke iii. 8.

   [862] Matt. iii. 7; Luke iii. 7.

   [863] Tit. iii. 3-5.

   [864] Probably a quotation from a hymn.

   [865] Ps. cx. 3. Septuagint has, "before the morning star."

   [866] John i. 1.

   [867] Tit. ii. 11-13.

   [868] [Isa. xlii. 10. Note that in all the Psalms where this expression
   is used, there is a foretaste of the New Covenant and of the
   manifestation of the Word.]

   [869] Eph. ii. 2.

   [870] Phil. ii. 6, 7.

   [871] John i. 23.

   [872] Isa. xl. 3.

   [873] Isa. liv. 1.

   [874] This may be translated, "of God the Christ."

   [875] John x. 9.

   [876] Matt. xi. 27.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter II.--The Absurdity and Impiety of the Heathen Mysteries and Fables
      About the Birth and Death of Their Gods.

   Explore not then too curiously the shrines of impiety, or the mouths of
   caverns full of monstrosity, or the Thesprotian caldron, or the
   Cirrhæan tripod, or the Dodonian copper. The Gerandryon, [877] once
   regarded sacred in the midst of desert sands, and the oracle there gone
   to decay with the oak itself, consigned to the region of antiquated
   fables. The fountain of Castalia is silent, and the other fountain of
   Colophon; and, in like manner, all the rest of the springs of
   divination are dead, and stripped of their vainglory, although at a
   late date, are shown with their fabulous legends to have run dry.
   Recount to us also the useless [878] oracles of that other kind of
   divination, or rather madness, the Clarian, the Pythian, the Didymæan,
   that of Amphiaraus, of Apollo, of Amphilochus; and if you will, couple
   [879] with them the expounders of prodigies, the augurs, and the
   interpreters of dreams. And bring and place beside the Pythian those
   that divine by flour, and those that divine by barley, and the
   ventriloquists still held in honour by many. Let the secret shrines of
   the Egyptians and the necromancies of the Etruscans be consigned to
   darkness. Insane devices truly are they all of unbelieving men. Goats,
   too, have been confederates in this art of soothsaying, trained to
   divination; and crows taught by men to give oracular responses to men.

   And what if I go over the mysteries? I will not divulge them in
   mockery, as they say Alcibiades did, but I will expose right well by
   the word of truth the sorcery hidden in them; and those so-called gods
   of yours, whose are the mystic rites, I shall display, as it were, on
   the stage of life, to the spectators of truth. The bacchanals hold
   their orgies in honour of the frenzied Dionysus, celebrating their
   sacred frenzy by the eating of raw flesh, and go through the
   distribution of the parts of butchered victims, crowned with snakes,
   shrieking out the name of that Eva by whom error came into the world.
   The symbol of the Bacchic orgies is a consecrated serpent. Moreover,
   according to the strict interpretation of the Hebrew term, the name
   Hevia, aspirated, signifies a female serpent.

   Demeter and Proserpine have become the heroines of a mystic drama; and
   their wanderings, and seizure, and grief, Eleusis celebrates by
   torchlight processions. I think that the derivation of orgies and
   mysteries ought to be traced, the former to the wrath (orge) of Demeter
   against Zeus, the latter to the nefarious wickedness (musos) relating
   to Dionysus; but if from Myus of Attica, who Pollodorus says was killed
   in hunting--no matter, I don't grudge your mysteries the glory of
   funeral honours. You may understand mysteria in another way, as
   mytheria (hunting fables), the letters of the two words being
   interchanged; for certainly fables of this sort hunt after the most
   barbarous of the Thracians, the most senseless of the Phrygians, and
   the superstitious among the Greeks.

   Perish, then, the man who was the author of this imposture among men,
   be he Dardanus, who taught the mysteries of the mother of the gods, or
   Eetion, who instituted the orgies and mysteries of the Samothracians,
   or that Phrygian Midas who, having learned the cunning imposture from
   Odrysus, communicated it to his subjects. For I will never be persuaded
   by that Cyprian Islander Cinyras, who dared to bring forth from night
   to the light of day the lewd orgies of Aphrodité in his eagerness to
   deify a strumpet of his own country. Others say that Melampus the son
   of Amythaon imported the festivals of Ceres from Egypt into Greece,
   celebrating her grief in song.

   These I would instance as the prime authors of evil, the parents of
   impious fables and of deadly superstition, who sowed in human life that
   seed of evil and ruin--the mysteries.

   And now, for it is time, I will prove their orgies to be full of
   imposture and quackery. And if you have been initiated, you will laugh
   all the more at these fables of yours which have been held in honour. I
   publish without reserve what has been involved in secrecy, not ashamed
   to tell what you are not ashamed to worship.

   There is then the foam-born and Cyprus-born, the darling of Cinyras,--I
   mean Aphrodité, lover of the virilia, because sprung from them, even
   from those of Uranus, that were cut off,--those lustful members, that,
   after being cut off, offered violence to the waves. Of members so lewd
   a worthy fruit--Aphrodité--is born. In the rites which celebrate this
   enjoyment of the sea, as a symbol of her birth a lump of salt and the
   phallus are handed to those who are initiated into the art of
   uncleanness. And those initiated bring a piece of money to her, as a
   courtesan's paramours do to her.

   Then there are the mysteries of Demeter, and Zeus's wanton embraces of
   his mother, and the wrath of Demeter; I know not what for the future I
   shall call her, mother or wife, on which account it is that she is
   called Brimo, as is said; also the entreaties of Zeus, and the drink of
   gall, the plucking out of the hearts of sacrifices, and deeds that we
   dare not name. Such rites the Phrygians perform in honour of Attis and
   Cybele and the Corybantes. And the story goes, that Zeus, having torn
   away the orchites of a ram, brought them out and cast them at the
   breasts of Demeter, paying thus a fraudulent penalty for his violent
   embrace, pretending to have cut out his own. The symbols of initiation
   into these rites, when set before you in a vacant hour, I know will
   excite your laughter, although on account of the exposure by no means
   inclined to laugh. "I have eaten out of the drum, I have drunk out of
   the cymbal, I have carried the Cernos, [880] I have slipped into the
   bedroom." Are not these tokens a disgrace? Are not the mysteries
   absurdity?

   What if I add the rest? Demeter becomes a mother, Core [881] is reared
   up to womanhood. And, in course of time, he who begot her,--this same
   Zeus has intercourse with his own daughter Pherephatta,--after Ceres,
   the mother,--forgetting his former abominable wickedness. Zeus is both
   the father and the seducer of Core, and shamefully courts her in the
   shape of a dragon; his identity, however, was discovered. The token of
   the Sabazian mysteries to the initiated is "the deity gliding over the
   breast,"--the deity being this serpent crawling over the breasts of the
   initiated. Proof surely this of the unbridled lust of Zeus. Pherephatta
   has a child, though, to be sure, in the form of a bull, as an
   idolatrous poet says,--


   "The bull

   The dragon's father, and the father of the bull the dragon,

   On a hill the herdsman's hidden ox-goad,"--

   alluding, as I believe, under the name of the herdsman's ox-goad, to
   the reed wielded by bacchanals. Do you wish me to go into the story of
   Persephatta's gathering of flowers, her basket, and her seizure by
   Pluto (Aidoneus), and the rent in the earth, and the swine of Eubouleus
   that were swallowed up with the two goddesses; for which reason, in the
   Thesmophoria, speaking the Megaric tongue, they thrust out swine? This
   mythological story the women celebrate variously in different cities in
   the festivals called Thesmophoria and Scirophoria; dramatizing in many
   forms the rape of Pherephatta or Persephatta (Proserpine).

   The mysteries of Dionysus are wholly inhuman; for while still a child,
   and the Curetes danced around [his cradle] clashing their weapons, and
   the Titans having come upon them by stealth, and having beguiled him
   with childish toys, these very Titans tore him limb from limb when but
   a child, as the bard of this mystery, the Thracian Orpheus, says:--


   "Cone, and spinning-top, and limb-moving rattles,

   And fair golden apples from the clear-toned Hesperides."

   And the useless symbols of this mystic rite it will not be useless to
   exhibit for condemnation. These are dice, ball, hoop, apples, top,
   [882] looking-glass, tuft of wool.

   Athené (Minerva), to resume our account, having abstracted the heart of
   Dionysus, was called Pallas, from the vibrating of the heart; and the
   Titans who had torn him limb from limb, setting a caldron on a tripod,
   and throwing into it the members of Dionysus, first boiled them down,
   and then fixing them on spits, "held them over the fire." But Zeus
   having appeared, since he was a god, having speedily perceived the
   savour of the pieces of flesh that were being cooked,--that savour
   which your gods agree to have assigned to them as their
   perquisite,--assails the Titans with his thunderbolt, and consigns the
   members of Dionysus to his son Apollo to be interred. And he--for he
   did not disobey Zeus--bore the dismembered corpse to Parnassus, and
   there deposited it.

   If you wish to inspect the orgies of the Corybantes, then know that,
   having killed their third brother, they covered the head of the dead
   body with a purple cloth, crowned it, and carrying it on the point of a
   spear, buried it under the roots of Olympus. These mysteries are, in
   short, murders and funerals. And the priests of these rites, who are
   called kings of the sacred rites by those whose business it is to name
   them, give additional strangeness to the tragic occurrence, by
   forbidding parsley with the roots from being placed on the table, for
   they think that parsley grew from the Corybantic blood that flowed
   forth; just as the women, in celebrating the Thesmophoria, abstain from
   eating the seeds of the pomegranate which have fallen on the ground,
   from the idea that pomegranates sprang from the drops of the blood of
   Dionysus. Those Corybantes also they call Cabiric; and the ceremony
   itself they announce as the Cabiric mystery.

   For those two identical fratricides, having abstracted the box in which
   the phallus of Bacchus was deposited, took it to Etruria--dealers in
   honourable wares truly. They lived there as exiles, employing
   themselves in communicating the precious teaching of their
   superstition, and presenting phallic symbols and the box for the
   Tyrrhenians to worship. And some will have it, not improbably, that for
   this reason Dionysus was called Attis, because he was mutilated. And
   what is surprising at the Tyrrhenians, who were barbarians, being thus
   initiated into these foul indignities, when among the Athenians, and in
   the whole of Greece--I blush to say it--the shameful legend about
   Demeter holds its ground? For Demeter, wandering in quest of her
   daughter Core, broke down with fatigue near Eleusis, a place in Attica,
   and sat down on a well overwhelmed with grief. This is even now
   prohibited to those who are initiated, lest they should appear to mimic
   the weeping goddess. The indigenous inhabitants then occupied Eleusis:
   their names were Baubo, and Dusaules, and Triptolemus; and besides,
   Eumolpus and Eubouleus. Triptolemus was a herdsman, Eumolpus a
   shepherd, and Eubouleus a swineherd; from whom came the race of the
   Eumolpidæ and that of the Heralds--a race of Hierophants--who
   flourished at Athens.

   Well, then (for I shall not refrain from the recital), Baubo having
   received Demeter hospitably, reaches to her a refreshing draught; and
   on her refusing it, not having any inclination to drink (for she was
   very sad), and Baubo having become annoyed, thinking herself slighted,
   uncovered her shame, and exhibited her nudity to the goddess. Demeter
   is delighted at the sight, and takes, though with difficulty, the
   draught--pleased, I repeat, at the spectacle. These are the secret
   mysteries of the Athenians; these Orpheus records. I shall produce the
   very words of Orpheus, that you may have the great authority on the
   mysteries himself, as evidence for this piece of turpitude:--


   "Having thus spoken, she drew aside her garments,

   And showed all that shape of the body which it is improper to name,

   And with her own hand Baubo stripped herself under the breasts.

   Blandly then the goddess laughed and laughed in her mind,

   And received the glancing cup in which was the draught."

   And the following is the token of the Eleusinian mysteries: I have
   fasted, I have drunk the cup; I have received from the box; having
   done, I put it into the basket, and out of the basket into the chest.
   [883] Fine sights truly, and becoming a goddess; mysteries worthy of
   the night, and flame, and the magnanimous or rather silly people of the
   Erechthidæ and the other Greeks besides, "whom a fate they hope not for
   awaits after death." And in truth against these Heraclitus the Ephesian
   prophesies, as "the night-walkers, the magi, the bacchanals, the Lenæn
   revellers, the initiated." These he threatens with what will follow
   death, and predicts for them fire. For what are regarded among men as
   mysteries, they celebrate sacrilegiously. Law, then, and opinion, are
   nugatory. And the mysteries of the dragon are an imposture, which
   celebrates religiously mysteries that are no mysteries at all, and
   observes with a spurious piety profane rites. What are these mystic
   chests?--for I must expose their sacred things, and divulge things not
   fit for speech. Are they not sesame cakes, and pyramidal cakes, and
   globular and flat cakes, embossed all over, and lumps of salt, and a
   serpent the symbol of Dionysus Bassareus? And besides these, are they
   not pomegranates, and branches, and rods, and ivy leaves? and besides,
   round cakes and poppy seeds? And further, there are the unmentionable
   symbols of Themis, marjoram, a lamp, a sword, a woman's comb, which is
   a euphemism and mystic expression for the muliebria.

   O unblushing shamelessness! Once on a time night was silent, a veil for
   the pleasure of temperate men; but now for the initiated, the holy
   night is the tell-tale of the rites of licentiousness; and the glare of
   torches reveals vicious indulgences. Quench the flame, O Hierophant;
   reverence, O Torch-bearer, the torches. That light exposes Iacchus; let
   thy mysteries be honoured, and command the orgies to be hidden in night
   and darkness. [884]

   The fire dissembles not; it exposes and punishes what it is bidden.

   Such are the mysteries of the Atheists. [885] And with reason I call
   those Atheists who know not the true God, and pay shameless worship to
   a boy torn in pieces by the Titans, and a woman in distress, and to
   parts of the body that in truth cannot be mentioned for shame, held
   fast as they are in the double impiety, first in that they know not
   God, not acknowledging as God Him who truly is; the other and second is
   the error of regarding those who exist not, as existing and calling
   those gods that have no real existence, or rather no existence at all,
   who have nothing but a name. Wherefore the apostle reproves us, saying,
   "And ye were strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope, and
   without God in the world." [886]

   All honour to that king of the Scythians, whoever Anacharsis was, who
   shot with an arrow one of his subjects who imitated among the Scythians
   the mystery of the Mother of the gods, as practiced by the inhabitants
   of Cyzicus, beating a drum and sounding a cymbal strung from his neck
   like a priest of Cybele, condemning him as having become effeminate
   among the Greeks, and a teacher of the disease of effeminacy to the
   rest of the Cythians.

   Wherefore (for I must by no means conceal it) I cannot help wondering
   how Euhemerus of Agrigentum, and Nicanor of Cyprus, and Diagoras, and
   Hippo of Melos, and besides these, that Cyrenian of the name of
   Theodorus, and numbers of others, who lived a sober life, and had a
   clearer insight than the rest of the world into the prevailing error
   respecting those gods, were called Atheists; for if they did not arrive
   at the knowledge of the truth, they certainly suspected the error of
   the common opinion; which suspicion is no insignificant seed, and
   becomes the germ of true wisdom. One of these charges the Egyptians
   thus: "If you believe them to be gods, do not mourn or bewail them; and
   if you mourn and bewail them, do not any more regard them as gods." And
   another, taking an image of Hercules made of wood (for he happened most
   likely to be cooking something at home), said, "Come now, Hercules; now
   is the time to undergo for us this thirteenth labour, as you did the
   twelve for Eurystheus, and make this ready for Diagoras," and so cast
   it into the fire as a log of wood. For the extremes of ignorance are
   atheism and superstition, from which we must endeavour to keep. And do
   you not see Moses, the hierophant of the truth, enjoining that no
   eunuch, or emasculated man, or son of a harlot, should enter the
   congregation? By the two first he alludes to the impious custom by
   which men were deprived both of divine energy and of their virility;
   and by the third, to him who, in place of the only real God, assumes
   many gods falsely so called,--as the son of a harlot, in ignorance of
   his true father, may claim many putative fathers.

   There was an innate original communion between men and heaven, obscured
   through ignorance, but which now at length has leapt forth
   instantaneously from the darkness, and shines resplendent; as has been
   expressed by one [887] in the following lines:--


   "See'st thou this lofty, this boundless ether,

   Holding the earth in the embrace of its humid arms."

   And in these:--


   "O Thou, who makest the earth Thy chariot, and in the earth hast Thy
   seat,

   Whoever Thou be, baffling our efforts to behold Thee."

   And whatever else the sons of the poets sing.

   But sentiments erroneous, and deviating from what is right, and
   certainly pernicious, have turned man, a creature of heavenly origin,
   away from the heavenly life, and stretched him on the earth, by
   inducing him to cleave to earthly objects. For some, beguiled by the
   contemplation of the heavens, and trusting to their sight alone, while
   they looked on the motions of the stars, straightway were seized with
   admiration, and deified them, calling the stars gods from their motion
   (theos from thein); and worshipped the sun,--as, for example, the
   Indians; and the moon, as the Phrygians. Others, plucking the benignant
   fruits of earth-born plants, called grain Demeter, as the Athenians,
   and the vine Dionysus, as the Thebans. Others, considering the
   penalties of wickedness, deified them, worshipping various forms of
   retribution and calamity. Hence the Erinnyes, and the Eumenides, and
   the piacular deities, and the judges and avengers of crime, are the
   creations of the tragic poets.

   And some even of the philosophers, after the poets, make idols of forms
   of the affections in your breasts,--such as fear, and love, and joy,
   and hope; as, to be sure, Epimenides of old, who raised at Athens the
   altars of Insult and Impudence. Other objects deified by men take their
   rise from events, and are fashioned in bodily shape, such as a Dike, a
   Clotho, and Lachesis, and Atropos, and Heimarmene, and Auxo, and
   Thallo, which are Attic goddesses. There is a sixth mode of introducing
   error and of manufacturing gods, according to which they number the
   twelve gods, whose birth is the theme of which Hesiod sings in his
   Theogony, and of whom Homer speaks in all that he says of the gods. The
   last mode remains (for there are seven in all)--that which takes its
   rise from the divine beneficence towards men. For, not understanding
   that it is God that does us good, they have invented saviours in the
   persons of the Dioscuri, and Hercules the averter of evil, and
   Asclepius the healer. These are the slippery and hurtful deviations
   from the truth which draw man down from heaven, and cast him into the
   abyss. I wish to show thoroughly what like these gods of yours are,
   that now at length you may abandon your delusion, and speed your flight
   back to heaven. "For we also were once children of wrath, even as
   others; but God, being rich in mercy, for the great love wherewith He
   loved us, when we were now dead in trespasses, quickened us together
   with Christ." [888] For the Word is living, and having been buried with
   Christ, is exalted with God. But those who are still unbelieving are
   called children of wrath, reared for wrath. We who have been rescued
   from error, and restored to the truth, are no longer the nurslings of
   wrath. Thus, therefore, we who were once the children of lawlessness,
   have through the philanthropy of the Word now become the sons of God.

   But to you a poet of your own, Empedocles of Agrigentum, comes and
   says:--


   "Wherefore, distracted with grievous evils,

   You will never ease your soul of its miserable woes."

   The most of what is told of your gods is fabled and invented; and those
   things which are supposed to have taken place, are recorded of vile men
   who lived licentious lives:--


   "You walk in pride and madness,

   And leaving the right and straight path, you have gone away

   Through thorns and briars. Why do ye wander?

   Cease, foolish men, from mortals;

   Leave the darkness of night, and lay hold on the light."

   These counsels the Sibyl, who is at once prophetic and poetic, enjoins
   on us; and truth enjoins them on us too, stripping the crowd of deities
   of those terrifying and threatening masks of theirs, disproving the
   rash opinions formed of them by showing the similarity of names. For
   there are those who reckon three Jupiters: him of Æther in Arcadia, and
   the other two sons of Kronos; and of these, one in Crete, and the
   others again in Arcadia. And there are those that reckon five Athenes:
   the Athenian, the daughter of Hephæstus; the second, the Egyptian, the
   daughter of Nilus; the third the inventor of war, the daughter of
   Kronos; the fourth, the daughter of Zeus, whom the Messenians have
   named Coryphasia, from her mother; above all, the daughter of Pallas
   and Titanis, the daughter of Oceanus, who, having wickedly killed her
   father, adorned herself with her father's skin, as if it had been the
   fleece of a sheep. Further, Aristotle calls the first Apollo, the son
   of Hephæstus and Athene (consequently Athene is no more a virgin); the
   second, that in Crete, the son of Corybas; the third, the son Zeus; the
   fourth, the Arcadian, the son of Silenus (this one is called by the
   Arcadians Nomius); and in addition to these, he specifies the Libyan
   Apollo, the son of Ammon; and to these Didymus the grammarian adds a
   sixth, the son of Magnes. And now how many Apollos are there? They are
   numberless, mortal men, all helpers of their fellow-men who similarly
   with those already mentioned have been so called. And what were I to
   mention the many Asclepiuses, or all the Mercuries that are reckoned
   up, or the Vulcans of fable? Shall I not appear extravagant, deluging
   your ears with these numerous names?

   At any rate, the native countries of your gods, and their arts and
   lives, and besides especially their sepulchres, demonstrate them to
   have been men. Mars, accordingly, who by the poets is held in the
   highest possible honour:--


   "Mars, Mars, bane of men, blood-stained stormer of walls," [889] --

   this deity, always changing sides, and implacable, as Epicharmus says,
   was a Spartan; Sophocles knew him for a Thracian; others say he was an
   Arcadian. This god, Homer says, was bound thirteen months:--


   "Mars had his suffering; by Alöeus' sons,

   Otus and Ephialtes, strongly bound,

   He thirteen months in brazen fetters lay." [890]

   Good luck attend the Carians, who sacrifice dogs to him! And may the
   Scythians never leave off sacrificing asses, as Apollodorus and
   Callimachus relate:--


   "Phoebus rises propitious to the Hyperboreans,

   Then they offer sacrifices of asses to him."

   And the same in another place:--


   "Fat sacrifices of asses' flesh delight Phoebus."

   Hephæstus, whom Jupiter cast from Olympus, from its divine threshold,
   having fallen on Lemnos, practiced the art of working in brass, maimed
   in his feet:--


   "His tottering knees were bowed beneath his weight." [891]

   You have also a doctor, and not only a brass-worker among the gods. And
   the doctor was greedy of gold; Asclepius was his name. I shall produce
   as a witness your own poet, the Boeotian Pindar:--


   "Him even the gold glittering in his hands,

   Amounting to a splendid fee, persuaded

   To rescue a man, already death's capture, from his grasp;

   But Saturnian Jove, having shot his bolt through both,

   Quickly took the breath from their breasts,

   And his flaming thunderbolt sealed their doom."

   And Euripides:--


   "For Zeus was guilty of the murder of my son

   Asclepius, by casting the lightning flame at his breast."

   He therefore lies struck with lightning in the regions of Cynosuris.
   Philochorus also says, that Poseidon was worshipped as a physician in
   Tenos; and that Kronos settled in Sicily, and there was buried.
   Patroclus the Thurian, and Sophocles the younger, in three tragedies,
   have told the story of the Dioscuri; and these Dioscuri were only two
   mortals, if Homer is worthy of of credit:--


   "  .  .  .  .  .  . but they beneath the teeming earth,

   In Lacedæmon lay, their native land." [892]

   And, in addition, he who wrote the Cyprian poems says Castor was
   mortal, and death was decreed to him by fate; but Pollux was immortal,
   being the progeny of Mars. This he has poetically fabled. But Homer is
   more worthy of credit, who spoke as above of both the Dioscuri; and,
   besides, proved Herucles to be a mere phantom:--


   "The man Hercules, expert in mighty deeds."

   Hercules, therefore, was known by Homer himself as only a mortal man.
   And Hieronymus the philosopher describes the make of his body, as tall,
   [893] bristling-haired, robust; and Dicærchus says that he was
   square-built, muscular, dark, hook-nosed, with greyish eyes and long
   hair. This Hercules, accordingly, after living fifty-two years, came to
   his end, and was burned in a funeral pyre in OEta.

   As for the Muses, whom Alcander calls the daughters of Zeus and
   Mnemosyne, and the rest of the poets and authors deify and
   worship,--those Muses, in honour of whom whole states have already
   erected museums, being handmaids, were hired by Megaclo, the daughter
   of Macar. This Macar reigned over the Lesbians, and was always
   quarrelling with his wife; and Megaclo was vexed for her mother's sake.
   What would she not do on her account? Accordingly she hires those
   handmaids, being so many in number, and calls them Mysæ, according to
   the dialect of the Æolians. These she taught to sing deeds of the olden
   time, and play melodiously on the lyre. And they, by assiduously
   playing the lyre, and singing sweetly to it, soothed Macar, and put a
   stop to his ill-temper. Wherefore Megaclo, as a token of gratitude to
   them, on her mother's account erected brazen pillars, and ordered them
   to be held in honour in all the temples. Such, then, are the Muses.
   This account is in Myrsilus of Lesbos.

   And now, then, hear the loves of your gods, and the incredible tales of
   their licentiousness, and their wounds, and their bonds, and their
   laughings, and their fights, their servitudes too, and their banquets;
   and furthermore, their embraces, and tears, and sufferings, and lewd
   delights. Call me Poseidon, and the troop of damsels deflowered by him,
   Amphitrite, Amymone, Alope, Melanippe, Alcyone, Hippothoe, Chione, and
   myriads of others; with whom, though so many, the passions of your
   Poseidon were not satiated.

   Call me Apollo; this is Phoebus, both a holy prophet and a good
   adviser. But Sterope will not say that, nor Æthousa, nor Arsinoe, nor
   Zeuxippe, nor Prothoe, nor Marpissa, nor Hypsipyle. For Daphne alone
   escaped the prophet and seduction.

   And, above all, let the father of gods and men, according to you,
   himself come, who was so given to sexual pleasure, as to lust after
   all, and indulge his lust on all, like the goats of the Thmuitæ. And
   thy poems, O Homer, fill me with admiration!


   "He said, and nodded with his shadowy brows;

   Waved on the immortal head the ambrosial locks,

   And all Olympus trembled at his nod." [894]

   Thou makest Zeus venerable, O Homer; and the nod which thou dost
   ascribe to him is most reverend. But show him only a woman's girdle,
   and Zeus is exposed, and his locks are dishonoured. To what a pitch of
   licentiousness did that Zeus of yours proceed, who spent so many nights
   in voluptuousness with Alcmene? For not even these nine nights were
   long to this insatiable monster. But, on the contrary, a whole lifetime
   were short enough for his lust; that he might beget for us the
   evil-averting god.

   Hercules, the son of Zeus--a true son of Zeus--was the offspring of
   that long night, who with hard toil accomplished the twelve labours in
   a long time, but in one night deflowered the fifty daughters of
   Thestius, and thus was at once the debaucher and the bridegroom of so
   many virgins. It is not, then, without reason that the poets call him a
   cruel wretch and a nefarious scoundrel. It were tedious to recount his
   adulteries of all sorts, and debauching of boys. For your gods did not
   even abstain from boys, one having loved Hylas, another Hyacinthus,
   another Pelops, another Chrysippus, and another Ganymede. Let such gods
   as these be worshipped by your wives, and let them pray that their
   husbands be such as these--so temperate; that, emulating them in the
   same practices, they may be like the gods. Such gods let your boys be
   trained to worship, that they may grow up to be men with the accursed
   likeness of fornication on them received from the gods.

   But it is only the male deities, perhaps, that are impetuous in sexual
   indulgence.

   "The female deities stayed each in the house, for shame," [895] says
   Homer; the goddesses blushing, for modesty's sake, to look on Aphrodité
   when she had been guilty of adultery. But these are more passionately
   licentious, bound in the chains of adultery; Eos having disgraced
   herself with Tithonus, Selene with Endymion, Nereis with Æacus, Thetis
   with Peleus, Demeter with Jason, Persephatta with Adonis. And Aphrodité
   having disgraced herself with Ares, crossed over to Cinyra and married
   Anchises, and laid snares for Phaëthon, and loved Adonis. She contended
   with the ox-eyed Juno; and the goddesses un-robed for the sake of the
   apple, and presented themselves naked before the shepherd, that he
   might decide which was the fairest.

   But come, let us briefly go the round of the games, and do away with
   those solemn assemblages at tombs, the Isthmian, Nemean, and Pythian,
   and finally the Olympian. At Pytho the Pythian dragon is worshipped,
   and the festival-assemblage of the serpent is called by the name
   Pythia. At the Isthmus the sea spit out a piece of miserable refuse;
   and the Isthmian games bewail Melicerta.

   At Nemea another--a little boy, Archemorus--was buried; and the funeral
   games of the child are called Nemea. Pisa is the grave of the Phrygian
   charioteer, O Hellenes of all tribes; and the Olympian games, which are
   nothing else than the funeral sacrifices of Pelops, the Zeus of Phidias
   claims for himself. The mysteries were then, as is probable, games held
   in honour of the dead; so also were the oracles, and both became
   public. But the mysteries at Sagra [896] and in Alimus of Attica were
   confined to Athens. But those contests and phalloi consecrated to
   Dionysus were a world's shame, pervading life with their deadly
   influence. For Dionysus, eagerly desiring to descend to Hades, did not
   know the way; a man, by name Prosymnus, offers to tell him, not without
   reward. The reward was a disgraceful one, though not so in the opinion
   of Dionysus: it was an Aphrodisian favour that was asked of Dionysus as
   a reward. The god was not reluctant to grant the request made to him,
   and promises to fulfil it should he return, and confirms his promise
   with an oath. Having learned the way, he departed and again returned:
   he did not find Prosymnus, for he had died. In order to acquit himself
   of his promise to his lover, he rushes to his tomb, and burns with
   unnatural lust. Cutting a fig-branch that came to his hand, he shaped
   the phallus, and so performed his promise to the dead man. As a mystic
   memorial of this incident, phalloi are raised aloft in honour of
   Dionysus through the various cities. "For did they not make a
   procession in honour of Dionysus, and sing most shameless songs in
   honour of the pudenda, all would go wrong," says Heraclitus. This is
   that Pluto and Dionysus in whose honour they give themselves up to
   frenzy, and play the bacchanal,--not so much, in my opinion, for the
   sake of intoxication, as for the sake of the shameless ceremonial
   practiced. With reason, therefore, such as have become slaves of their
   passions are your gods!

   Furthermore, like the Helots among the Lacedemonians, Apollo came under
   the yoke of slavery to Admetus in Pheræ, Hercules to Omphale in Sardis.
   Poseidon was a drudge to Laomedon; and so was Apollo, who, like a
   good-for-nothing servant, was unable to obtain his freedom from his
   former master; and at that time the walls of Troy were built by them
   for the Phrygian. And Homer is not ashamed to speak of Athene as
   appearing to Ulysses with a golden lamp in her hand. And we read of
   Aphrodite, like a wanton serving-wench, taking and setting a seat for
   Helen opposite the adulterer, in order to entice him.

   Panyasis, too, tells us of gods in plenty besides those who acted as
   servants, writing thus:--


   "Demeter underwent servitude, and so did the famous lame god;

   Poseidon underwent it, and Apollo too, of the silver bow,

   With a mortal man for a year. And fierce Mars

   Underwent it at the compulsion of his father."

   And so on.

   Agreeably to this, it remains for me to bring before you those amatory
   and sensuous deities of yours, as in every respect having human
   feelings.


   "For theirs was a mortal body."

   This Homer most distinctly shows, by introducing Aphrodite uttering
   loud and shrill cries on account of her wound; and describing the most
   warlike Ares himself as wounded in the stomach by Diomede. Polemo, too,
   says that Athene was wounded by Ornytus; nay, Homer says that Pluto
   even was struck with an arrow by Hercules; and Panyasis relates that
   the beams of Sol were struck by the arrows of Hercules; [897] and the
   same Panyasis relates, that by the same Hercules Hera the goddess of
   marriage was wounded in sandy Pylos. Sosibius, too, relates that
   Hercules was wounded in the hand by the sons of Hippocoon. And if there
   are wounds, there is blood. For the ichor of the poets is more
   repulsive than blood; for the putrefaction of blood is called ichor.
   Wherefore cures and means of sustenance of which they stand in need
   must be furnished. Accordingly mention is made of tables, and
   potations, and laughter, and intercourse; for men would not devote
   themselves to love, or beget children, or sleep, if they were immortal,
   and had no wants, and never grew old. Jupiter himself, when the guest
   of Lycaon the Arcadian, partook of a human table among the
   Ethiopians--a table rather inhuman and forbidden. For he satiated
   himself with human flesh unwittingly; for the god did not know that
   Lycaon the Arcadian, his entertainer, had slain his son (his name was
   Nyctimus), and served him up cooked before Zeus.

   This is Jupiter the good, the prophetic, the patron of hospitality, the
   protector of suppliants, the benign, the author of omens, the avenger
   of wrongs; rather the unjust, the violater of right and of law, the
   impious, the inhuman, the violent, the seducer, the adulterer, the
   amatory. But perhaps when he was such he was a man; but now these
   fables seem to have grown old on our hands. Zeus is no longer a
   serpent, a swan, nor an eagle, nor a licentious man; the god no longer
   flies, nor loves boys, nor kisses, nor offers violence, although there
   are still many beautiful women, more comely than Leda, more blooming
   than Semele, and boys of better looks and manners than the Phrygian
   herdsman. Where is now that eagle? where now that swan? where now is
   Zeus himself? He has grown old with his feathers; for as yet he does
   not repent of his amatory exploits, nor is he taught continence. The
   fable is exposed before you: Leda is dead, the swan is dead. Seek your
   Jupiter. Ransack not heaven, but earth. The Cretan, in whose country he
   was buried, will show him to you,--I mean Callimachus, in his hymns:--


   "For thy tomb, O king,

   The Cretans fashioned!"

   For Zeus is dead, be not distressed, as Leda is dead, and the swan, and
   the eagle, and the libertine, and the serpent. And now even the
   superstitious seem, although reluctantly, yet truly, to have come to
   understand their error respecting the Gods.


   "For not from an ancient oak, nor from a rock,

   But from men, is thy descent." [898]

   But shortly after this, they will be found to be but oaks and stones.
   One Agamemnon is said by Staphylus to be worshipped as a Jupiter in
   Sparta; and Phanocles, in his book of the Brave and Fair, relates that
   Agamemnon king of the Hellenes erected the temple of Argennian
   Aphrodite, in honour of Argennus his friend. An Artemis, named the
   Strangled, is worshipped by the Arcadians, as Callimachus says in his
   Book of Causes; and at Methymna another Artemis had divine honours paid
   her, viz., Artemis Condylitis. There is also the temple of another
   Artemis--Artemis Podagra (or, the gout)--in Laconica, as Sosibius says.
   Polemo tells of an image of a yawning Apollo; and again of another
   image, reverenced in Elis, of the guzzling Apollo. Then the Eleans
   sacrifice to Zeus, the averter of flies; and the Romans sacrifice to
   Hercules, the averter of flies; and to Fever, and to Terror, whom also
   they reckon among the attendants of Hercules. (I pass over the Argives,
   who worshipped Aphrodite, opener of graves.) The Argives and Spartans
   reverence Artemis Chelytis, or the cougher, from keluttein, which in
   their speech signifies to cough.

   Do you imagine from what source these details have been quoted? Only
   such as are furnished by yourselves are here adduced; and you do not
   seem to recognise your own writers, whom I call as witnesses against
   your unbelief. Poor wretches that ye are, who have filled with unholy
   jesting the whole compass of your life--a life in reality devoid of
   life!

   Is not Zeus the Baldhead worshipped in Argos; and another Zeus, the
   avenger, in Cyprus? Do not the Argives sacrifice to Aphrodite Peribaso
   (the protectress), [899] and the Athenians to Aphrodite Hetæra (the
   courtesan), and the Syracusans to Aphrodite Kallipygos, whom Nicander
   has somewhere called Kalliglutos (with beautiful rump). I pass over in
   silence just now Dionysus Choiropsales. [900] The Sicyonians reverence
   this deity, whom they have constituted the god of the muliebria--the
   patron of filthiness--and religiously honour as the author of
   licentiousness. Such, then, are their gods; such are they also who make
   mockery of the gods, or rather mock and insult themselves. How much
   better are the Egyptians, who in their towns and villages pay divine
   honours to the irrational creatures, than the Greeks, who worship such
   gods as these?

   For if they are beasts, they are not adulterous or libidinous, and seek
   pleasure in nothing that is contrary to nature. And of what sort these
   deities are, what need is there further to say, as they have been
   already sufficiently exposed? Furthermore, the Egyptians whom I have
   now mentioned are divided in their objects of worship. The Syenites
   worship the braize-fish; and the maiotes--this is another fish--is
   worshipped by those who inhabit Elephantine: the Oxyrinchites likewise
   worship a fish which takes its name from their country. Again, the
   Heraclitopolites worship the ichneumon, the inhabitants of Sais and of
   Thebes a sheep, the Leucopolites a wolf, the Cynopolites a dog, the
   Memphites Apis, the Mendesians a goat. And you, who are altogether
   better than the Egyptians (I shrink from saying worse), who never cease
   laughing every day of your lives at the Egyptians, what are some of
   you, too, with regard to brute beasts? For of your number the
   Thessalians pay divine homage to storks, in accordance with ancient
   custom; and the Thebans to weasels, for their assistance at the birth
   of Hercules. And again, are not the Thessalians reported to worship
   ants, since they have learned that Zeus in the likeness of an ant had
   intercourse with Eurymedusa, the daughter of Cletor, and begot
   Myrmidon? Polemo, too, relates that the people who inhabit the Troad
   worship the mice of the country, which they call Sminthoi, because they
   gnawed the strings of their enemies' bows; and from those mice Apollo
   has received his epithet of Sminthian. Heraclides, in his work,
   Regarding the Building of Temples in Acarnania, says that, at the place
   where the promontory of Actium is, and the temple of Apollo of Actium,
   they offer to the flies the sacrifice of an ox.

   Nor shall I forget the Samians: the Samians, as Euphorion says,
   reverence the sheep. Nor shall I forget the Syrians, who inhabit
   Phoenicia, of whom some revere doves, and others fishes, with as
   excessive veneration as the Eleans do Zeus. Well, then, since those you
   worship are not gods, it seems to me requisite to ascertain if those
   are really demons who are ranked, as you say, in this second order
   [next to the gods]. For if the lickerish and impure are demons,
   indigenous demons who have obtained sacred honours may be discovered in
   crowds throughout your cities: Menedemus among the Cythnians; among the
   Tenians, Callistagoras; among the Delians, Anius; among the Laconians,
   Astrabacus; at Phalerus, a hero affixed to the prow of ships is
   worshipped; and the Pythian priestess enjoined the Platæans to
   sacrifice to Androcrates and Democrates, and Cyclæus and Leuco while
   the Median war was at its height. Other demons in plenty may be brought
   to light by any one who can look about him a little.


   "For thrice ten thousand are there in the all-nourishing earth

   Of demons immortal, the guardians of articulate-speaking men." [901]

   Who these guardians are, do not grudge, O Boeotian, to tell. Is it not
   clear that they are those we have mentioned, and those of more renown,
   the great demons, Apollo, Artemis, Leto, Demeter, Core, Pluto,
   Hercules, and Zeus himself?

   But it is from running away that they guard us, O Ascræan, or perhaps
   it is from sinning, as forsooth they have never tried their hand at sin
   themselves! In that case verily the proverb may fitly be uttered:--


   "The father who took no admonition admonishes his son."

   If these are our guardians, it is not because they have any ardour of
   kindly feeling towards us, but intent on your ruin, after the manner of
   flatterers, they prey on your substance, enticed by the smoke. These
   demons themselves indeed confess their own gluttony, saying:--


   "For with drink-offerings due, and fat of lambs,

   My altar still hath at their hands been fed;

   Such honour hath to us been ever paid." [902]

   What other speech would they utter, if indeed the gods of the
   Egyptians, such as cats and weasels, should receive the faculty of
   speech, than that Homeric and poetic one which proclaims their liking
   for savoury odours and cookery? Such are your demons and gods, and
   demigods, if there are any so called, as there are demi-asses (mules);
   for you have no want of terms to make up compound names of impiety.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [877] What this is, is not known; but it is likely that the word is a
   corruption of ieran drun, the sacred oak.

   [878] achresta chresteia.

   [879] The text has anierou, the imperative of anieroo, which in
   classical Greek means "to hallow;" but the verb here must be derived
   from the adjective anieros, and be taken in the sense "deprive of their
   holiness," "no longer count holy." Eusebius reads anierous: "unholy
   interpreters."

   [880] The cernos some take to be a vessel containing poppy, etc.,
   carried in sacrificial processions. The scholiast says that it is a
   fan. [I have marked this as a quotation. See below: Eleusinian rites.]

   [881] Proserpine or Pherephatta.

   [882] The scholiast takes the rhimbos to mean a piece of wood attached
   to a cord, and swung round so as to cause a whistling noise.

   [883] [See supra, p. 175, where I have affixed quotation-marks, and
   adopted the word "tokens" (instead of "signs") to harmonize these two
   places]

   [884] This sentence is read variously in various editions.

   [885] [A scathing retort upon those who called Christians atheists, and
   accused them of shameful rites.]

   [886] Eph. ii. 12.

   [887] Euripides.

   [888] Eph. ii. 3-5.

   [889] Iliad, v. 31.

   [890] Iliad, v. 385.

   [891] Iliad, xviii. 411.

   [892] Iliad, iii. 243. Lord Derby's translation is used in extracts
   from the Iliad.

   [893] The mss. read "small," but the true reading is doubtless "tall."

   [894] Iliad, i. 528

   [895] Odyss., viii. 324.

   [896] Meursius proposed to read, "at Agra."

   [897] The beams of Sol or the Sun is an emendation of Potter's. The
   mss. read "the Elean Augeas."

   [898] Odyss., xix. 163.

   [899] So Liddell and Scott. Commentators are generally agreed that the
   epithet is an obscene one, though what its precise meaning is they can
   only conjecture.

   [900] An obscene epithet, derived from choiros, a sow, and thlibo, to
   press.

   [901] Hesiod, Works and Days, I. i. 250.

   [902] Iliad, iv. 48.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter III.--The Cruelty of the Sacrifices to the Gods.

   Well, now, let us say in addition, what inhuman demons, and hostile to
   the human race, your gods were, not only delighting in the insanity of
   men, but gloating over human slaughter,--now in the armed contests for
   superiority in the stadia, and now in the numberless contests for
   renown in the wars providing for themselves the means of pleasure, that
   they might be able abundantly to satiate themselves with the murder of
   human beings.

   And now, like plagues invading cities and nations, they demanded cruel
   oblations. Thus, Aristomenes the Messenian slew three hundred human
   beings in honour of Ithometan Zeus, thinking that hecatombs of such a
   number and quality would give good omens; among whom was Theopompos,
   king of the Lacedemonians, a noble victim.

   The Taurians, the people who inhabit the Tauric Chersonese, sacrifice
   to the Tauric Artemis forthwith whatever strangers they lay hands on on
   their coasts who have been cast adrift on the sea. These sacrifices
   Euripides represents in tragedies on the stage. Monimus relates, in his
   treatise on marvels, that at Pella, in Thessaly, a man of Achaia was
   slain in sacrifice to Peleus and Chiron. That the Lyctii, who are a
   Cretan race, slew men in sacrifice to Zeus, Anticlides shows in his
   Homeward Journeys; and that the Lesbians offered the like sacrifice to
   Dionysus, is said by Dosidas. The Phocæans also (for I will not pass
   over such as they are), Pythocles informs us in his third book, On
   Concord, offer a man as a burnt-sacrifice to the Taurian Artemis.

   Erechtheus of Attica and Marius the Roman [903] sacrificed their
   daughters,--the former to Pherephatta, as Demaratus mentions in his
   first book on Tragic Subjects; the latter to the evil-averting deities,
   as Dorotheus relates in his first book of Italian Affairs.
   Philanthropic, assuredly, the demons appear, from these examples; and
   how shall those who revere the demons not be correspondingly pious? The
   former are called by the fair name of saviours; and the latter ask for
   safety from those who plot against their safety, imagining that they
   sacrifice with good omens to them, and forget that they themselves are
   slaying men. For a murder does not become a sacrifice by being
   committed in a particular spot. You are not to call it a sacred
   sacrifice, if one slays a man either at the altar or on the highway to
   Artemis or Zeus, any more than if he slew him for anger or
   covetousness,--other demons very like the former; but a sacrifice of
   this kind is murder and human butchery. Then why is it, O men, wisest
   of all creatures, that you avoid wild beasts, and get out of the way of
   the savage animals, if you fall in with a bear or lion?


   ".  .  .  .  .  As when some traveller spies,

   Coiled in his path upon the mountain side,

   A deadly snake, back he recoils in haste,--

   His limbs all trembling, and his cheek all pale," [904]

   But though you perceive and understand demons to be deadly and wicked,
   plotters, haters of the human race, and destroyers, why do you not turn
   out of their way, or turn them out of yours? What truth can the wicked
   tell, or what good can they do any one?

   I can then readily demonstrate that man is better than these gods of
   yours, who are but demons; and can show, for instance, that Cyrus and
   Solon were superior to oracular Apollo. Your Phoebus was a lover of
   gifts, but not a lover of men. He betrayed his friend Croesus, and
   forgetting the reward he had got (so careful was he of his fame), led
   him across the Halys to the stake. The demons love men in such a way as
   to bring them to the fire [unquenchable].

   But O man, who lovest the human race better, and art truer than Apollo,
   pity him that is bound on the pyre. Do thou, O Solon, declare truth;
   and thou, O Cyrus, command the fire to be extinguished. Be wise, then,
   at last, O Croesus, taught by suffering. He whom you worship is an
   ingrate; he accepts your reward, and after taking the gold plays false.
   "Look again to the end, O Solon." It is not the demon, but the man that
   tells you this. It is not ambiguous oracles that Solon utters. You
   shall easily take him up. Nothing but true, O Barbarian, shall you find
   by proof this oracle to be, when you are placed on the pyre. Whence I
   cannot help wondering, by what plausible reasons those who first went
   astray were impelled to preach superstition to men, when they exhorted
   them to worship wicked demons, whether it was Phoroneus or Merops, or
   whoever else that raised temples and altars to them; and besides, as is
   fabled, were the first to offer sacrifices to them. But,
   unquestionably, in succeeding ages men invented for themselves gods to
   worship. It is beyond doubt that this Eros, who is said to be among the
   oldest of the gods, was worshipped by no one till Charmus took a little
   boy and raised an altar to him in Academia,--a thing more seemly [905]
   than the lust he had gratified; and the lewdness of vice men called by
   the name of Eros, deifying thus unbridled lust. The Athenians, again,
   knew not who Pan was till Philippides told them.

   Superstition, then, as was to be expected, having taken its rise thus,
   became the fountain of insensate wickedness; and not being subsequently
   checked, but having gone on augmenting and rushing along in full flood,
   it became the originator of many demons, and was displayed in
   sacrificing hecatombs, appointing solemn assemblies, setting up images,
   and building temples, which were in reality tombs: for I will not pass
   these over in silence, but make a thorough exposure of them, though
   called by the august name of temples; that is, the tombs which got the
   name of temples. But do ye now at length quite give up your
   superstition, feeling ashamed to regard sepulchres with religious
   veneration. In the temple of Athene in Larissa, on the Acropolis, is
   the grave of Acrisius; and at Athens, on the Acropolis, is that of
   Cecrops, as Antiochus says in the ninth book of his Histories. What of
   Erichthonius? was he not buried in the temple of Polias? And Immarus,
   the son of Eumolpus and Daira, were they not buried in the precincts of
   the Elusinium, which is under the Acropolis; and the daughters of
   Celeus, were they not interred in Eleusis? Why should I enumerate to
   you the wives of the Hyperboreans? They were called Hyperoche and
   Laodice; they were buried in the Artemisium in Delos, which is in the
   temple of the Delian Apollo. Leandrius says that Clearchus was buried
   in Miletus, in the Didymæum. Following the Myndian Zeno, it were
   unsuitable in this connection to pass over the sepulchre of
   Leucophryne, who was buried in the temple of Artemis in Magnesia; or
   the altar of Apollo in Telmessus, which is reported to be the tomb of
   Telmisseus the seer. Further, Ptolemy the son of Agesarchus, in his
   first book about Philopator, says that Cinyras and the descendants of
   Cinyras were interred in the temple of Aphrodite in Paphos. But all
   time would not be sufficient for me, were I to go over the tombs which
   are held sacred by you. And if no shame for these audacious impieties
   steals over you, it comes to this, that you are completely dead,
   putting, as really you do, your trust in the dead.


   "Poor wretches, what misery is this you suffer?

   Your heads are enveloped in the darkness of night." [906]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [903] Plutarch, xx.

   [904] Iliad, iii. 33.

   [905] If we read chariesteron, this is the only sense that can be put
   on the words. But if we read charisterion, we may translate "a memorial
   of gratified lust."

   [906] Odyss., xx. 351.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter IV.--The Absurdity and Shamefulness of the Images by Which the
      Gods are Worshipped.

   If, in addition, I take and set before you for inspection these very
   images, you will, as you go over them, find how truly silly is the
   custom in which you have been reared, of worshipping the senseless
   works of men's hands.

   Anciently, then, the Scythians worshipped their sabres, the Arabs
   stones, the Persians rivers. And some, belonging to other races still
   more ancient, set up blocks of wood in conspicuous situations, and
   erected pillars of stone, which were called Xoana, from the carving of
   the material of which they were made. The image of Artemis in Icarus
   was doubtless unwrought wood, and that of the Cithæronian Here was a
   felled tree-trunk; and that of the Samian Here, as Æthlius says, was at
   first a plank, and was afterwards during the government of Proclus
   carved into human shape. And when the Xoana began to be made in the
   likeness of men, they got the name of Brete,--a term derived from
   Brotos (man). In Rome, the historian Varro says that in ancient times
   the Xoaron of Mars--the idol by which he was worshipped--was a spear,
   artists not having yet applied themselves to this specious pernicious
   art; but when art flourished, error increased. That of stones and
   stocks--and, to speak briefly, of dead matter--you have made images of
   human form, by which you have produced a counterfeit of piety, and
   slandered the truth, is now as clear as can be; but such proof as the
   point may demand must not be declined.

   That the statue of Zeus at Olympia, and that of Polias at Athens, were
   executed of gold and ivory by Phidias, is known by everybody; and that
   the image of Here in Samos was formed by the chisel of Euclides,
   Olympichus relates in his Samiaca. Do not, then, entertain any doubt,
   that of the gods called at Athens venerable, Scopas made two of the
   stone called Lychnis, and Calos the one which they are reported to have
   had placed between them, as Polemon shows in the fourth of his books
   addressed to Timæus. Nor need you doubt respecting the images of Zeus
   and Apollo at Patara, in Lycia, which Phidias executed, as well as the
   lions that recline with them; and if, as some say, they were the work
   of Bryxis, I do not dispute,--you have in him another maker of images.
   Whichever of these you like, write down. Furthermore, the statues nine
   cubits in height of Poseidon and Amphitrite, worshipped in Tenos, are
   the work of Telesius the Athenian, as we are told by Philochorus.
   Demetrius, in the second book of his Argolics, writes of the image of
   Here in Tiryns, both that the material was pear-tree and the artist was
   Argus.

   Many, perhaps, may be surprised to learn that the Palladium which is
   called the Diopetes--that is, fallen from heaven--which Diomede and
   Ulysses are related to have carried off from Troy and deposited at
   Demophoon, was made of the bones of Pelops, as the Olympian Jove of
   other bones--those of the Indian wild beast. I adduce as my authority
   Dionysius, who relates this in the fifth part of his Cycle. And
   Apellas, in the Delphics, says that there were two Palladia, and that
   both were fashioned by men. But that one may suppose that I have passed
   over them through ignorance, I shall add that the image of Dionysus
   Morychus at Athens was made of the stones called Phellata, and was the
   work of Simon the son of Eupalamus, as Polemo says in a letter. There
   were also two other sculptors of Crete, as I think: they were called
   Scyles and Dipoenus; and these executed the statues of the Dioscuri in
   Argos, and the image of Hercules in Tiryns, and the effigy of the
   Munychian Artemis in Sicyon. Why should I linger over these, when I can
   point out to you the great deity himself, and show you who he
   was,--whom indeed, conspicuously above all, we hear to have been
   considered worthy of veneration? Him they have dared to speak of as
   made without hands--I mean the Egyptian Serapis. For some relate that
   he was sent as a present by the people of Sinope to Ptolemy
   Philadelphus, king of the Egyptians, who won their favour by sending
   them corn from Egypt when they were perishing with famine; and that
   this idol was an image of Pluto; and Ptolemy, having received the
   statue, placed it on the promontory which is now called Racotis; where
   the temple of Serapis was held in honour, and the sacred enclosure
   borders on the spot; and that Blistichis the courtesan having died in
   Canopus, Ptolemy had her conveyed there, and buried beneath the
   forementioned shrine.

   Others say that the Serapis was a Pontic idol, and was transported with
   solemn pomp to Alexandria. Isidore alone says that it was brought from
   the Seleucians, near Antioch, who also had been visited with a dearth
   of corn, and had been fed by Ptolemy. But Athenodorns the son of
   Sandon, while wishing to make out the Serapis to be ancient, has
   somehow slipped into the mistake of proving it to be an image fashioned
   by human hands. He says that Sesostris the Egyptian king, having
   subjugated the most of the Hellenic races, on his return to Egypt
   brought a number of craftsmen with him. Accordingly he ordered a statue
   of Osiris, his ancestor, to be executed in sumptuous style; and the
   work was done by the artist Bryaxis, not the Athenian, but another of
   the same name, who employed in its execution a mixture of various
   materials. For he had filings of gold, and silver, and lead, and in
   addition, tin; and of Egyptian stones not one was wanting, and there
   were fragments of sapphire, and hematite, and emerald, and topaz.
   Having ground down and mixed together all these ingredients, he gave to
   the composition a blue colour, whence the darkish hue of the image; and
   having mixed the whole with the colouring matter that was left over
   from the funeral of Osiris and Apis, moulded the Serapis, the name of
   which points to its connection with sepulture and its construction from
   funeral materials, compounded as it is of Osiris and Apis, which
   together make Osirapis.

   Another new deity was added to the number with great religious pomp in
   Egypt, and was near being so in Greece by the king of the Romans, who
   deified Antinous, whom he loved as Zeus loved Ganymede, and whose
   beauty was of a very rare order: for lust is not easily restrained,
   destitute as it is of fear; and men now observe the sacred nights of
   Antinous, the shameful character of which the lover who spent them with
   him knew well. Why reckon him among the gods, who is honoured on
   account of uncleanness? And why do you command him to be lamented as a
   son? And why should you enlarge on his beauty? Beauty blighted by vice
   is loathsome. Do not play the tyrant, O man, over beauty, nor offer
   foul insult to youth in its bloom. Keep beauty pure, that it may be
   truly fair. Be king over beauty, not its tyrant. Remain free, and then
   I shall acknowledge thy beauty, because thou hast kept its image pure:
   then will I worship that true beauty which is the archetype of all who
   are beautiful. Now the grave of the debauched boy is the temple and
   town of Antinous. For just as temples are held in reverence, so also
   are sepulchres, and pyramids, and mausoleums, and labyrinths, which are
   temples of the dead, as the others are sepulchres of the gods. As
   teacher on this point, I shall produce to you the Sibyl prophetess:--


   "Not the oracular lie of Phoebus,

   Whom silly men called God, and falsely termed Prophet;

   But the oracles of the great God, who was not made by men's hands,

   Like dumb idols of Sculptured stone." [907]

   She also predicts the ruin of the temple, foretelling that that of the
   Ephesian Artemis would be engulphed by earthquakes and rents in the
   ground, as follows:--


   "Prostrate on the ground Ephesus shall wail, weeping by the shore,

   And seeking a temple that has no longer an inhabitant."

   She says also that the temple of Isis and Serapis would be demolished
   and burned:--


   "Isis, thrice-wretched goddess, thou shalt linger by the streams of the
   Nile;

   Solitary, frenzied, silent, on the sands of Acheron."

   Then she proceeds:--


   "And thou, Serapis, covered with a heap of white stones,

   Shalt lie a huge ruin in thrice-wretched Egypt."

   But if you attend not to the prophetess, hear at least your own
   philosopher, the Ephesian Heraclitus, upbraiding images with their
   senselessness: "And to these images they pray, with the same result as
   if one were to talk to the walls of his house." For are they not to be
   wondered at who worship stones, and place them before the doors, as if
   capable of activity? They worship Hermes as a god, and place Aguieus as
   a doorkeeper. For if people upbraid them with being devoid of
   sensation, why worship them as gods? And if they are thought to be
   endowed with sensation, why place them before the door? The Romans, who
   ascribed their greatest successes to Fortune, and regarded her as a
   very great deity, took her statue to the privy, and erected it there,
   assigning to the goddess as a fitting temple--the necessary. But
   senseless wood and stone, and rich gold, care not a whit for either
   savoury odour, or blood, or smoke, by which, being at once honoured and
   fumigated, they are blackened; no more do they for honour or insult.
   And these images are more worthless than any animal. I am at a loss to
   conceive how objects devoid of sense were deified, and feel compelled
   to pity as miserable wretches those that wander in the mazes of this
   folly: for if some living creatures have not all the senses, as worms
   and caterpillars, and such as even from the first appear imperfect, as
   moles and the shrew-mouse, which Nicander says is blind and uncouth;
   yet are they superior to those utterly senseless idols and images. For
   they have some one sense,--say, for example, hearing, or touching, or
   something analogous to smell or taste; while images do not possess even
   one sense. There are many creatures that have neither sight, nor
   hearing, nor speech, such as the genus of oysters, which yet live and
   grow, and are affected by the changes of the moon. But images, being
   motionless, inert, and senseless, are bound, nailed, glued,--are
   melted, filed, sawed, polished, carved. The senseless earth is
   dishonoured by the makers of images, who change it by their art from
   its proper nature, and induce men to worship it; and the makers of gods
   worship not gods and demons, but in my view earth and art, which go to
   make up images. For, in sooth, the image is only dead matter shaped by
   the craftsman's hand. But we have no sensible image of sensible matter,
   but an image that is perceived by the mind alone,--God, who alone is
   truly God. [908]

   And again, when involved in calamities, the superstitious worshippers
   of stones, though they have learned by the event that senseless matter
   is not to be worshipped, yet, yielding to the pressure of misfortune,
   become the victims of their superstition; and though despising the
   images, yet not wishing to appear wholly to neglect them, are found
   fault with by those gods by whose names the images are called.

   For Dionysius the tyrant, the younger, having stripped off the golden
   mantle from the statue of Jupiter in Sicily, ordered him to be clothed
   in a woollen one, remarking facetiously that the latter was better than
   the golden one, being lighter in summer and warmer in winter. And
   Antiochus of Cyzicus, being in difficulties for money, ordered the
   golden statue of Zeus, fifteen cubits in height, to be melted; and one
   like it, of less valuable material, plated with gold, to be erected in
   place of it. And the swallows and most birds fly to these statues, and
   void their excrement on them, paying no respect either to Olympian
   Zeus, or Epidaurian Asclepius, or even to Athene Polias, or the
   Egyptian Serapis; but not even from them have you learned the
   senselessness of images. [909] But it has happened that miscreants or
   enemies have assailed and set fire to temples, and plundered them of
   their votive gifts, and melted even the images themselves, from base
   greed of gain. And if a Cambyses or a Darius, or any other madman, has
   made such attempts, and if one has killed the Egyptian Apis, I laugh at
   him killing their god, while pained at the outrage being perpetrated
   for the sake of gain. I will therefore willingly forget such villany,
   looking on acts like these more as deeds of covetousness, than as a
   proof of the impotence of idols. But fire and earthquakes are shrewd
   enough not to feel shy or frightened at either demons or idols, any
   more than at pebbles heaped by the waves on the shore.

   I know fire to be capable of exposing and curing superstition. If thou
   art willing to abandon this folly, the element of fire shall light thy
   way. This same fire burned the temple in Argos, with Chrysis the
   priestess; and that of Artemis in Ephesus the second time after the
   Amazons. And the Capitol in Rome was often wrapped in flames; nor did
   the fire spare the temple of Serapis, in the city of the Alexandrians.
   At Athens it demolished the temple of the Eleutherian Dionysus; and as
   to the temple of Apollo at Delphi, first a storm assailed it, and then
   the discerning fire utterly destroyed it. This is told as the preface
   of what the fire promises. And the makers of images, do they not shame
   those of you who are wise into despising matter? The Athenian Phidias
   inscribed on the finger of the Olympian Jove, Pantarkes [910] is
   beautiful. It was not Zeus that was beautiful in his eyes, but the man
   he loved. And Praxiteles, as Posidippus relates in his book about
   Cnidus, when he fashioned the statue of Aphrodite of Cnidus, made it
   like the form of Cratine, of whom he was enamoured, that the miserable
   people might have the paramour of Praxiteles to worship. And when
   Phryne the courtesan, the Thespian, was in her bloom, all the painters
   made their pictures of Aphrodite copies of the beauty of Phryne; as,
   again, the sculptors at Athens made their Mercuries like Alcibiades. It
   remains for you to judge whether you ought to worship courtesans.
   Moved, as I believe, by such facts, and despising such fables, the
   ancient kings unblushingly proclaimed themselves gods, as this involved
   no danger from men, and thus taught that on account of their glory they
   were made immortal. Ceux, the son of Eolus, was styled Zeus by his wife
   Alcyone; Alcyone, again, being by her husband styled Hera. Ptolemy the
   Fourth was called Dionysus; and Mithridates of Pontus was also called
   Dionysus; and Alexander wished to be considered the son of Ammon, and
   to have his statue made horned by the sculptors--eager to disgrace the
   beauty of the human form by the addition of a horn. And not kings only,
   but private persons dignified themselves with the names of deities, as
   Menecrates the physician, who took the name of Zeus. What need is there
   for me to instance Alexarchus? He, having been by profession a
   grammarian, assumed the character of the sun-god, as Aristus of Salamis
   relates. And why mention Nicagorus? He was a native of Zela [in
   Pontus], and lived in the days of Alexander. Nicagorus was styled
   Hermes, and used the dress of Hermes, as he himself testifies. And
   whilst whole nations, and cities with all their inhabitants, sinking
   into self-flattery, treat the myths about the gods with contempt, at
   the same time men themselves, assuming the air of equality with the
   gods, and being puffed up with vainglory, vote themselves extravagant
   honours. There is the case of the Macedonian Philip of Pella, the son
   of Amyntor, to whom they decreed divine worship in Cynosargus, although
   his collar-bone was broken, and he had a lame leg, and had one of his
   eyes knocked out. And again that of Demetrius, who was raised to the
   rank of the gods; and where he alighted from his horse on his entrance
   into Athens is the temple of Demetrius the Alighter; and altars were
   raised to him everywhere, and nuptials with Athene assigned to him by
   the Athenians. But he disdained the goddess, as he could not marry the
   statue; and taking the courtesan Lamia, he ascended the Acropolis, and
   lay with her on the couch of Athene, showing to the old virgin the
   postures of the young courtesan.

   There is no cause for indignation, then, at Hippo, who immortalized his
   own death. For this Hippo ordered the following elegy to be inscribed
   on his tomb:--


   "This is the sepulchre of Hippo, whom Destiny

   Made, through death, equal to the immortal gods."

   Well done, Hippo! thou showest to us the delusion of men. If they did
   not believe thee speaking, now that thou art dead, let them become thy
   disciples. This is the oracle of Hippo; let us consider it. The objects
   of your worship were once men, and in process of time died; and fable
   and time have raised them to honour. For somehow, what is present is
   wont to be despised through familiarity; but what is past, being
   separated through the obscurity of time from the temporary censure that
   attached to it, is invested with honour by fiction, so that the present
   is viewed with distrust, the past with admiration. Exactly in this way
   is it, then, that the dead men of antiquity, being reverenced through
   the long prevalence of delusion respecting them, are regarded as gods
   by posterity. As grounds of your belief in these, there are your
   mysteries, your solemn assemblies, bonds and wounds, and weeping
   deities.


   "Woe, woe! that fate decrees my best-belov'd,

   Sarpedon, by Patroclus' hand to fall." [911]

   The will of Zeus was overruled; and Zeus being worsted, laments for
   Sarpedon. With reason, therefore, have you yourselves called them
   shades and demons, since Homer, paying Athene and the other divinities
   sinister honour, has styled them demons:--


   "She her heavenward course pursued

   To join the immortals in the abode of Jove." [912]

   How, then, can shades and demons be still reckoned gods, being in
   reality unclean and impure spirits, acknowledged by all to be of an
   earthly and watery nature, sinking downwards by their own weight, and
   flitting about graves and tombs, about which they appear dimly, being
   but shadowy phantasms? Such things are your gods--shades and shadows;
   and to these add those maimed, wrinkled, squinting divinities the Litæ,
   daughters of Thersites rather than of Zeus. So that Bion--wittily, as I
   think--says, How in reason could men pray Zeus for a beautiful
   progeny,--a thing he could not obtain for himself?

   The incorruptible being, as far as in you lies, you sink in the earth;
   and that pure and holy essence you have buried in the grave, robbing
   the divine of its true nature.

   Why, I pray you, have you assigned the prerogatives of God to what are
   no gods? Why, let me ask, have you forsaken heaven to pay divine honour
   to earth? What else is gold, or silver, or steel, or iron, or brass, or
   ivory, or precious stones? Are they not earth, and of the earth?

   Are not all these things which you look on the progeny of one
   mother--the earth?

   Why, then, foolish and silly men (for I will repeat it), have you,
   defaming the supercelestial region, dragged religion to the ground, by
   fashioning to yourselves gods of earth, and by going after those
   created objects, instead of the uncreated Deity, have sunk into deepest
   darkness?

   The Parian stone is beautiful, but it is not yet Poseidon. The ivory is
   beautiful, but it is not yet the Olympian Zeus. Matter always needs art
   to fashion it, but the deity needs nothing. Art has come forward to do
   its work, and the matter is clothed with its shape; and while the
   preciousness of the material makes it capable of being turned to
   profitable account, it is only on account of its form that it comes to
   be deemed worthy of veneration. Thy image, if considered as to its
   origin, is gold, it is wood, it is stone, it is earth, which has
   received shape from the artist's hand. But I have been in the habit of
   walking on the earth, not of worshipping it. For I hold it wrong to
   entrust my spirit's hopes to things destitute of the breath of life. We
   must therefore approach as close as possible to the images. How
   peculiarly inherent deceit is in them, is manifest from their very
   look. For the forms of the images are plainly stamped with the
   characteristic nature of demons. If one go round and inspect the
   pictures and images, he will at a glance recognise your gods from their
   shameful forms: Dionysus from his robe; Hephæstus from his art; Demeter
   from her calamity; Ino from her head-dress; Poseidon from his trident;
   Zeus from the swan; the pyre indicates Heracles; and if one sees a
   statue of a naked woman without an inscription, he understands it to be
   the golden Aphrodite. Thus that Cyprian Pygmalion became enamoured of
   an image of ivory: the image was Aphrodite, and it was nude. The
   Cyprian is made a conquest of by the mere shape, and embraces the
   image. This is related by Philostephanus. A different Aphrodite in
   Cnidus was of stone, and beautiful. Another person became enamoured of
   it, and shamefully embraced the stone. Posidippus relates this. The
   former of these authors, in his book on Cyprus, and the latter in his
   book on Cnidus. So powerful is art to delude, by seducing amorous men
   into the pit. Art is powerful, but it cannot deceive reason, nor those
   who live agreeably to reason. The doves on the picture were represented
   so to the life by the painter's art, that the pigeons flew to them; and
   horses have neighed to well-executed pictures of mares. They say that a
   girl became enamoured of an image, and a comely youth of the statue at
   Cnidus. But it was the eyes of the spectators that were deceived by
   art; for no one in his senses ever would have embraced a goddess, or
   entombed himself with a lifeless paramour, or become enamoured of a
   demon and a stone. But it is with a different kind of spell that art
   deludes you, if it leads you not to the indulgence of amorous
   affections: it leads you to pay religious honour and worship to images
   and pictures.

   The picture is like. Well and good! Let art receive its meed of praise,
   but let it not deceive man by passing itself off for truth. The horse
   stands quiet; the dove flutters not, its wing is motionless. But the
   cow of Dædalus, made of wood, allured the savage bull; and art having
   deceived him, compelled him to meet a woman full of licentious passion.
   Such frenzy have mischief-working arts created in the minds of the
   insensate. On the other hand, apes are admired by those who feed and
   care for them, because nothing in the shape of images and girls'
   ornaments of wax or clay deceives them. You then will show yourselves
   inferior to apes by cleaving to stone, and wood, and gold, and ivory
   images, and to pictures. Your makers of such mischievous toys--the
   sculptors and makers of images, the painters and workers in metal, and
   the poets--have introduced a motley crowd of divinities: in the fields,
   Satyrs and Pans; in the woods, Nymphs, and Oreads, and Hamadryads; and
   besides, in the waters, the rivers, and fountains, the Naiads; and in
   the sea the Nereids. And now the Magi boast that the demons are the
   ministers of their impiety, reckoning them among the number of their
   domestics, and by their charms compelling them to be their slaves.
   Besides, the nuptials of the deities, their begetting and bringing
   forth of children that are recounted, their adulteries celebrated in
   song, their carousals represented in comedy, and bursts of laughter
   over their cups, which your authors introduce, urge me to cry out,
   though I would fain be silent. Oh the godlessness! You have turned
   heaven into a stage; the Divine has become a drama; and what is sacred
   you have acted in comedies under the masks of demons, travestying true
   religion by your demon-worship [superstition].


   "But he, striking the lyre, began to sing beautifully." [913]

   Sing to us, Homer, that beautiful song


   "About the amours of Ares and Venus with the beautiful crown:

   How first they slept together in the palace of Hephæstus

   Secretly; and he gave many gifts, and dishonoured the bed and chamber
   of king Hephæstus."

   Stop, O Homer, the song! It is not beautiful; it teaches adultery, and
   we are prohibited from polluting our ears with hearing about adultery
   for we are they who bear about with us, in this living and moving image
   of our human nature, the likeness of God,--a likeness which dwells with
   us, takes counsel with us, associates with us, is a guest with us,
   feels with us, feels for us. We have become a consecrated offering to
   God for Christ's sake: we are the chosen generation, the royal
   priesthood, the holy nation, the peculiar people, who once were not a
   people, but are now the people of God; who, according to John, are not
   of those who are beneath, but have learned all from Him who came from
   above; who have come to understand the dispensation of God; who have
   learned to walk in newness of life. But these are not the sentiments of
   the many; but, casting off shame and fear, they depict in their houses
   the unnatural passions of the demons. Accordingly, wedded to impurity,
   they adorn their bed-chambers with painted tablets [914] hung up in
   them, regarding licentiousness as religion; and lying in bed, in the
   midst of their embraces, they look on that Aphrodite locked in the
   embrace of her paramour. And in the hoops of their rings they cut a
   representation of the amorous bird that fluttered round Leda,--having a
   strong predilection for representations of effeminacy,--and use a seal
   stamped with an impression of the licentiousness of Zeus. Such are
   examples of your voluptuousness, such are the theologies of vice, such
   are the instructions of your gods, who commit fornication along with
   you; for what one wishes, that he thinks, according to the Athenian
   orator. And of what kind, on the other hand, are your other images?
   Diminutive Pans, and naked girls, and drunken Satyrs, and phallic
   tokens, painted naked in pictures disgraceful for filthiness. And more
   than this: you are not ashamed in the eyes of all to look at
   representations of all forms of licentiousness which are portrayed in
   public places, but set them up and guard them with scrupulous care,
   consecrating these pillars of shamelessness at home, as if, forsooth,
   they were the images of your gods, depicting on them equally the
   postures of Philænis and the labours of Heracles. Not only the use of
   these, but the sight of them, and the very hearing of them, we denounce
   as deserving the doom of oblivion. Your ears are debauched, your eyes
   commit fornication, your looks commit adultery before you embrace. O ye
   that have done violence to man, and have devoted to shame what is
   divine in this handiwork of God, you disbelieve everything that you may
   indulge your passions, and that ye may believe in idols, because you
   have a craving after their licentiousness, but disbelieve God, because
   you cannot bear a life of self-restraint. You have hated what was
   better, and valued what was worse, having been spectators indeed of
   virtue, but actors of vice. Happy, therefore, so to say, alone are all
   those with one accord,--


   "Who shall refuse to look on any temples

   And altars, worthless seats of dumb stones,

   And idols of stone, and images made by hands,

   Stained with the life's-blood, and with sacrifices

   Of quadrupeds, and bipeds, and fowls, and butcheries of wild beasts."
   [915]

   For we are expressly prohibited from exercising a deceptive art: "For
   thou shalt not make," says the prophet, "the likeness of anything which
   is in heaven above or in the earth beneath." [916]

   For can we possibly any longer suppose the Demeter, and the Core, and
   the mystic Iacchus of Praxiteles, to be gods, and not rather regard the
   art of Leucippus, or the hands of Apelles, which clothed the material
   with the form of the divine glory, as having a better title to the
   honour? But while you bestow the greatest pains that the image may be
   fashioned with the most exquisite beauty possible, you exercise no care
   to guard against your becoming like images for stupidity. Accordingly,
   with the utmost clearness and brevity, the prophetic word condemns this
   practice: "For all the gods of the nations are the images of demons;
   but God made the heavens, and what is in heaven." [917] Some, however,
   who have fallen into error, I know not how, worship God's work instead
   of God Himself,--the sun and the moon, and the rest of the starry
   choir,--absurdly imagining these, which are but instruments for
   measuring time, to be gods; "for by His word they were established, and
   all their host by the breath of His mouth." [918]

   Human art, moreover, produces houses, and ships, and cities, and
   pictures. But how shall I tell what God makes? Behold the whole
   universe; it is His work: and the heaven, and the sun, and angels, and
   men, are the works of His fingers. [919] How great is the power of God!
   His bare volition was the creation of the universe. For God alone made
   it, because He alone is truly God. By the bare exercise of volition He
   creates; His mere willing was followed by the springing into being of
   what He willed. Consequently the choir of philosophers are in error,
   who indeed most nobly confess that man was made for the contemplation
   of the heavens, but who worship the objects that appear in the heavens
   and are apprehended by sight. For if the heavenly bodies are not the
   works of men, they were certainly created for man. Let none of you
   worship the sun, but set his desires on the Maker of the sun; nor deify
   the universe, but seek after the Creator of the universe. The only
   refuge, then, which remains for him who would reach the portals of
   salvation is divine wisdom. From this, as from a sacred asylum, the man
   who presses after salvation, can be dragged by no demon.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [907] Vulg., Sibyllini, p. 253.

   [908] [The Trent Creed makes the saints and their images objects of
   worship. It is evident that Clement never imagined the existence of an
   image among Christians. See p. 188, infra.]

   [909] [The Trent Creed makes the saints and their images objects of
   worship. It is evident that Clement never imagined the existence of an
   image among Christians. See p. 188, infra.]

   [910] Pantarkes is said to have been the name of a boy loved by
   Phidias: but as the word signifies "all-assisting," "all-powerful," it
   might also be made to apply to Zeus.

   [911] Iliad, xvi. 433.

   [912] Iliad, i. 221; meta daimonas allous.

   [913] Odyss., viii. 266.

   [914] [Is not this a rebuke to many of the figures and pictures which
   vulgarize abodes of wealth in America?]

   [915] Sibyl. Justin Martyr, Cohort. ad Græcos, p. 81. See p. 280, vol.
   i of this series.

   [916] Ex. xx. 4. [Clement even regards the art of painters and
   sculptors as unlawful for Christians.]

   [917] Ps. xcvi. 5.

   [918] Ps. xxxiii. 6.

   [919] Ps. viii. 3.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter V.--The Opinions of the Philosophers Respecting God.

   Let us then run over, if you choose, the opinions of the philosophers,
   to which they give boastful utterance, respecting the gods; that we may
   discover philosophy itself, through its conceit making an idol of
   matter; although we are able to show, as we proceed, that even while
   deifying certain demons, it has a dream of the truth. The elements were
   designated as the first principles of all things by some of them: by
   Thales of Miletus, who celebrated water, and Anaximenes, also of
   Miletus, who celebrated air as the first principle of all things, and
   was followed afterwards by Diogenes of Apollonia. Parmenides of Elia
   introduced fire and earth as gods; one of which, namely fire, Hippasus
   of Metapontum and Heraclitus of Ephesus supposed a divinity. Empedocles
   of Agrigentum fell in with a multitude, and, in addition to those four
   elements, enumerates disagreement and agreement. Atheists surely these
   are to be reckoned, who through an unwise wisdom worshipped matter, who
   did not indeed pay religious honour to stocks and stones, but deified
   earth, the mother of these,--who did not make an image of Poseidon, but
   revered water itself. For what else, according to the original
   signification, is Poseidon, but a moist substance? the name being
   derived from posis (drink); as, beyond doubt, the warlike Ares is so
   called, from arsis (rising up) and anoeresis (destroying). For this
   reason mainly, I think, many fix a sword into the ground, and sacrifice
   to it as to Ares. The Scythians have a practice of this nature, as
   Eudoxus tells us in the second book of his Travels. The Sauromatæ, too,
   a tribe of the Scythians, worship a sabre, as Ikesius says in his work
   on Mysteries.

   This was also the case with Heraclitus and his followers, who
   worshipped fire as the first cause; for this fire others named
   Hephæstus. The Persian Magi, too, and many of the inhabitants of Asia,
   worshipped fire; and besides them, the Macedonians, as Diogenes relates
   in the first book of his Persica. Why specify the Sauromatæ, who are
   said by Nymphodorus, in his Barbaric Customs, to pay sacred honours to
   fire? or the Persians, or the Medes, or the Magi? These, Dino tells us,
   sacrifice beneath the open sky, regarding fire and water as the only
   images of the gods.

   Nor have I failed to reveal their ignorance; for, however much they
   think to keep clear of error in one form, they slide into it in
   another.

   They have not supposed stocks and stones to be images of the gods, like
   the Greeks; nor ibises and ichneumons, like the Egyptians; but fire and
   water, as philosophers. Berosus, in the third book of his Chaldaics,
   shows that it was after many successive periods of years that men
   worshipped images of human shape, this practice being introduced by
   Artaxerxes, the son of Darius, and father of Ochus, who first set up
   the image of Aphrodite Anaitis at Babylon and Susa; and Ecbatana set
   the example of worshipping it to the Persians; the Bactrians, to
   Damascus and Sardis.

   Let the philosophers, then, own as their teachers the Persians, or the
   Sauromatæ, or the Magi, from whom they have learned the impious
   doctrine of regarding as divine certain first principles, being
   ignorant of the great First Cause, the Maker of all things, and Creator
   of those very first principles, the unbeginning God, but reverencing
   "these weak and beggarly elements," [920] as the apostle says, which
   were made for the service of man. And of the rest of the philosophers
   who, passing over the elements, have eagerly sought after something
   higher and nobler, some have discanted on the Infinite, of whom were
   Anaximander of Miletus, Anaxagoras of Clazomenæ, and the Athenian
   Archelaus, both of whom set Mind (nous) above Infinity; while the
   Milesian Leucippus and the Chian Metrodorus apparently inculcated two
   first principles--fulness and vacuity. Democritus of Abdera, while
   accepting these two, added to them images ei dola; while Alcmæon of
   Crotona supposed the stars to be gods, and endowed with life (I will
   not keep silence as to their effrontery). Xenocrates of Chalcedon
   indicates that the planets are seven gods, and that the universe,
   composed of all these, is an eighth. Nor will I pass over those of the
   Porch, who say that the Divinity pervades all matter, even the vilest,
   and thus clumsily disgrace philosophy. Nor do I think will it be taken
   ill, having reached this point, to advert to the Peripatetics. The
   father of this sect, not knowing the Father of all things, thinks that
   He who is called the Highest is the soul of the universe; that is, he
   supposes the soul of the world to be God, and so is pierced by his own
   sword. For by first limiting the sphere of Providence to the orbit of
   the moon, and then by supposing the universe to be God, he confutes
   himself, inasmuch as he teaches that that which is without God is God.
   And that Eresian Theophrastus, the pupil of Aristotle, conjectures at
   one time heaven, and at another spirit, to be God. Epicurus alone I
   shall gladly forget, who carries impiety to its full length, and thinks
   that God takes no charge of the world. What, moreover, of Heraclides of
   Pontus? He is dragged everywhere to the images--the eidola--of
   Democritus.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [920] Gal. iv. 9.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter VI.--By Divine Inspiration Philosophers Sometimes Hit on the
      Truth.

   A great crowd of this description rushes on my mind, introducing, as it
   were, a terrifying apparition of strange demons, speaking of fabulous
   and monstrous shapes, in old wives' talk. Far from enjoining men to
   listen to such tales are we, who avoid the practice of soothing our
   crying children, as the saying is, by telling them fabulous stories,
   being afraid of fostering in their minds the impiety professed by those
   who, though wise in their own conceit, have no more knowledge of the
   truth than infants. For why (in the name of truth!) do you make those
   who believe you subject to ruin and corruption, dire and irretrievable?
   Why, I beseech you, fill up life with idolatrous images, by feigning
   the winds, or the air, or fire, or earth, or stones, or stocks, or
   steel, or this universe, to be gods; and, prating loftily of the
   heavenly bodies in this much vaunted science of astrology, not
   astronomy, to those men who have truly wandered, talk of the wandering
   stars as gods? It is the Lord of the spirits, the Lord of the fire, the
   Maker of the universe, Him who lighted up the sun, that I long for. I
   seek after God, not the works of God. Whom shall I take as a helper in
   my inquiry? We do not, if you have no objection, wholly disown Plato.
   How, then, is God to be searched out, O Plato? "For both to find the
   Father and Maker of this universe is a work of difficulty; and having
   found Him, to declare Him fully, is impossible." [921]

   Why so? by Himself, I beseech you! For He can by no means be expressed.
   Well done, Plato! Thou hast touched on the truth. But do not flag.
   Undertake with me the inquiry respecting the Good. For into all men
   whatever, especially those who are occupied with intellectual pursuits,
   a certain divine effluence has been instilled; wherefore, though
   reluctantly, they confess that God is one, indestructible, unbegotten,
   and that somewhere above in the tracts of heaven, in His own peculiar
   appropriate eminence, whence He surveys all things, He has an existence
   true and eternal.


   "Tell me what I am to conceive God to be,

   Who sees all things, and is Himself unseen,"

   Euripides says. Accordingly, Menander seems to me to have fallen into
   error when he said:--


   "O sun! for thou, first of gods, ought to be worshipped,

   By whom it is that we are able to see the other gods."

   For the sun never could show me the true God; but that healthful Word,
   that is the Sun of the soul, by whom alone, when He arises in the
   depths of the soul, the eye of the soul itself is irradiated. Whence
   accordingly, Democritus, not without reason, says, "that a few of the
   men of intellect, raising their hands upwards to what we Greeks now
   call the air (aer), called the whole expanse Zeus, or God: He, too,
   knows all things, gives and takes away, and He is King of all."

   Of the same sentiments is Plato, who somewhere alludes to God thus:
   "Around the King of all are all things, and He is the cause of all good
   things." Who, then, is the King of all? God, who is the measure of the
   truth of all existence. As, then, the things that are to be measured
   are contained in the measure, so also the knowledge of God measures and
   comprehends truth. And the truly holy Moses says: "There shall not be
   in thy bag a balance and a balance, great or small, but a true and just
   balance shall be to thee," [922] deeming the balance and measure and
   number of the whole to be God. For the unjust and unrighteous idols are
   hid at home in the bag, and, so to speak, in the polluted soul. But the
   only just measure is the only true God, always just, continuing the
   self-same; who measures all things, and weighs them by righteousness as
   in a balance, grasping and sustaining universal nature in equilibrium.
   "God, therefore, as the old saying has it, occupying the beginning, the
   middle, and the end of all that is in being, keeps the straight course,
   while He makes the circuit of nature; and justice always follows Him,
   avenging those who violate the divine law."

   Whence, O Plato, is that hint of the truth which thou givest? Whence
   this rich copiousness of diction, which proclaims piety with oracular
   utterance? The tribes of the barbarians, he says, are wiser than these;
   I know thy teachers, even if thou wouldst conceal them. You have
   learned geometry from the Egyptians, astronomy from the Babylonians;
   the charms of healing you have got from the Thracians; the Assyrians
   also have taught you many things; but for the laws that are consistent
   with truth, and your sentiments respecting God, you are indebted to the
   Hebrews, [923]


   "Who do not worship through vain deceits

   The works of men, of gold, and brass, and silver, and ivory,

   And images of dead men, of wood and stone,

   Which other men, led by their foolish inclinations, worship;

   But raise to heaven pure arms:

   When they rise from bed, purifying themselves with water,

   And worship alone the Eternal, who reigns for ever more."

   And let it not be this one man alone--Plato; but, O philosophy, hasten
   to produce many others also, who declare the only true God to be God,
   through His inspiration, if in any measure they have grasped the truth.
   For Antisthenes did not think out this doctrine of the Cynics; but it
   is in virtue of his being a disciple of Socrates that he says, "that
   God is not like to any; wherefore no one can know Him from an image."
   And Xenophon the Athenian would have in his own person committed freely
   to writing somewhat of the truth, and given the same testimony as
   Socrates, had he not been afraid of the cup of poison, which Socrates
   had to drink. But he hints nothing less; he says: "How great and
   powerful He is who moves all things, and is Himself at rest, is
   manifest; but what He is in form is not revealed. The sun himself,
   intended to be the source of light to all around, does not deem it
   fitting to allow himself to be looked at; but if any one audaciously
   gazes on him, he is deprived of sight." Whence, then, does the son of
   Gryllus learn his wisdom? Is it not manifestly from the prophetess of
   the Hebrews [924] who prophesies in the following style?--


   "What flesh can see with the eye the celestial,

   The true, the immortal God, who inhabits the vault of heaven?

   Nay, men born mortal cannot even stand

   Before the rays of the sun."

   Cleanthes Pisadeus, [925] the Stoic philosopher, who exhibits not a
   poetic theogony, but a true theology, has not concealed what sentiments
   he entertained respecting God:--


   "If you ask me what is the nature of the good, listen:

   That which is regular, just, holy, pious.

   Self-governing, useful, fair, fitting,

   Grave, independent, always beneficial;

   That feels no fear or grief; profitable, painless,

   Helpful, pleasant, safe, friendly;

   Held in esteem, agreeing with itself, honourable;

   Humble, careful, meek, zealous,

   Perennial, blameless, ever-during:

   Mean is every one who looks to opinion

   With the view of obtaining some advantage from it."

   Here, as I think, he clearly teaches of what nature God is; and that
   the common opinion and religious customs enslave those that follow
   them, but seek not after God.

   We must not either keep the Pythagoreans in the background, who say:
   "God is one; and He is not, as some suppose, outside of this frame of
   things, but within it; but, in all the entireness of His being, is in
   the whole circle of existence, surveying all nature, and blending in
   harmonious union the whole,--the author of all His own forces and
   works, the giver of light in heaven, and Father of all,--the mind and
   vital power of the whole world,--the mover of all things." For the
   knowledge of God, these utterances, written by those we have mentioned
   through the inspiration of God, and selected by us, may suffice even
   for the man that has but small power to examine into truth.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [921] Timæus.

   [922] Deut. xxv. 13, 15.

   [923] [This great truth comes forcibly from an Attic scholar. Let me
   refer to a very fine passage in another Christian scholar, William
   Cowper (Task, book ii.): "All truth is from the sempiternal source,"
   etc.]

   [924] The Sibyl.

   [925] Or Asseus, native of Asso.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter VII.--The Poets Also Bear Testimony to the Truth.

   Let poetry also approach to us (for philosophy alone will not suffice):
   poetry which is wholly occupied with falsehood--which scarcely will
   make confession of the truth, but will rather own to God its deviations
   into fable. Let whoever of those poets chooses advance first. Aratus
   considers that the power of God pervades all things:--


   "That all may be secure,

   Him ever they propitiate first and last,

   Hail, Father I great marvel, great gain to man."

   Thus also the Ascræan Hesiod dimly speaks of God:--


   "For He is the King of all, and monarch

   Of the immortals; and there is none that may vie

   with Him in power."

   Also on the stage they reveal the truth:--


   "Look on the ether and heaven, and regard that as God,"

   says Euripides. And Sophocles, the son of Sophilus, says:--


   "One, in truth, one is God,

   Who made both heaven and the far-stretching earth,

   And ocean's blue wave, and the mighty winds;

   But many of us mortals, deceived in heart,

   Have set up for ourselves, as a consolation in our afflictions,

   Images of the gods of stone, or wood, or brass,

   Or gold, or ivory;

   And, appointing to those sacrifices and vain festal assemblages,

   Are accustomed thus to practice religion."

   In this venturous manner has he on the stage brought truth before the
   spectators. But the Thracian Orpheus, the son of OEagrus, hierophant
   and poet at once, after his exposition of the orgies, and his theology
   of idols, introduces a palinode of truth with true solemnity, though
   tardily singing the strain:--


   "I shall utter to whom it is lawful; but let the doors be closed,

   Nevertheless, against all the profane. But do thou hear,

   O Musæus, offspring of the light-bringing moon,

   For I will declare what is true. And let not these things

   Which once appeared in your breast rob you of dear life;

   But looking to the divine word, apply yourself to it,

   Keeping right the seat of intellect and feeling; and walk well

   In the straight path, and to the immortal King of the universe alone

   Direct your gaze."

   Then proceeding, he clearly adds:--


   "He is one, self-proceeding; and from Him alone all things proceed,

   And in them He Himself exerts his activity: no mortal

   Beholds Him, but He beholds all."

   Thus far Orpheus at last understood that he had been in error:--


   "But linger no longer, O man, endued with varied wisdom;

   But turn and retrace your steps, and propitiate God."

   For if, at the most, the Greeks, having received certain scintillations
   of the divine word, have given forth some utterances of truth, they
   bear indeed witness that the force of truth is not hidden, and at the
   same time expose their own weakness in not having arrived at the end.
   For I think it has now become evident to all, that those who do or
   speak aught without the word of truth are like people compelled to walk
   without feet. Let the strictures on your gods, which the poets,
   impelled by the force of truth, introduce in their comedies, shame you
   into salvation. Menander, for instance, the comic poet, in his drama of
   the Charioteer, says:--


   "No God pleases me that goes about

   With an old woman, and enters houses

   Carrying a trencher."

   For such are the begging priests of Cybele. Hence Antisthenes replies
   appropriately to their request for alms:--


   "I do not maintain the mother of the gods,

   For the gods maintain her."

   Again, the same writer of comedy, expressing his dissatisfaction with
   the common usages, tries to expose the impious arrogance of the
   prevailing error in the drama of the Priestess, sagely declaring:--


   "If a man drags the Deity

   Whither he will by the sound of cymbals,

   He that does this is greater than the Deity;

   But these are the instruments of audacity and means of living

   Invented by men."

   And not only Menander, but Homer also, and Euripides, and other poets
   in great numbers, expose your gods, and are wont to rate them, and that
   soundly too. For instance, they call Aphrodite dog-fly, and Hephæstus a
   cripple. Helen says to Aphrodite:--


   "Thy godship abdicate!

   Renounce Olympus!" [926]

   And of Dionysus, Homer writes without reserve:--


   "He, mid their frantic orgies, in the groves

   Of lovely Nyssa, put to shameful rout

   The youthful Bacchus' nurses; they in fear,

   Dropped each her thyrsus, scattered by the hand

   Of fierce Lycurgus, with an ox-goad armed." [927]

   Worthy truly of the Socratic school is Euripides, who fixes his eye on
   truth, and despises the spectators of his plays. On one occasion,
   Apollo,


   "Who inhabits the sanctuary that is in the middle of the earth,

   Dispensing most certain oracles to mortals,"

   is thus exposed:--


   "It was in obedience to him that I killed her who brought me forth;

   Him do you regard as stained with guilt--put him to death;

   It was he that sinned, not I, uninstructed as I was

   In right and justice." [928]

   He introduces Heracles, at one time mad, at another drunk and
   gluttonous. How should he not so represent the god who, when
   entertained as a guest, ate green figs to flesh, uttering discordant
   howls, that even his barbarian host remarked it? In his drama of Ion,
   too, he barefacedly brings the gods on the stage:--


   "How, then, is it right for you, who have given laws to mortals,

   To be yourselves guilty of wrong?

   And if--what will never take place, yet I will state the supposition--

   You will give satisfaction to men for your adulteries,

   You, Poseidon, and you, Zeus, the ruler of heaven,--

   You will, in order to make recompense for your misdeeds,

   Have to empty your temples." [929]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [926] Il., iii. 406.

   [927] Il., vi. 132.

   [928] Orestes, 590.

   [929] Ion, 442.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter VIII.--The True Doctrine is to Be Sought in the Prophets.

   It is now time, as we have despatched in order the other points, to go
   to the prophetic Scriptures; for the oracles present us with the
   appliances necessary for the attainment of piety, and so establish the
   truth. The divine Scriptures and institutions of wisdom form the short
   road to salvation. Devoid of embellishment, of outward beauty of
   diction, of wordiness and seductiveness, they raise up humanity
   strangled by wickedness, teaching men to despise the casualties of
   life; and with one and the same voice remedying many evils, they at
   once dissuade us from pernicious deceit, and clearly exhort us to the
   attainment of the salvation set before us. Let the Sibyl [930]
   prophetess, then, be the first to sing to us the song of salvation:--


   "So He is all sure and unerring:

   Come, follow no longer darkness and gloom;

   See, the sun's sweet-glancing light shines gloriously.

   Know, and lay up wisdom in your hearts:

   There is one God, who sends rains, and winds, and earthquakes,

   Thunderbolts, famines, plagues, and dismal sorrows,

   And snows and ice. But why detail particulars?

   He reigns over heaven, He rules earth,

   He truly is;"--

   where, in remarkable accordance with inspiration [931] she compares
   delusion to darkness, and the knowledge of God to the sun and light,
   and subjecting both to comparison, shows the choice we ought to make.
   For falsehood is not dissipated by the bare presentation of the truth,
   but by the practical improvement of the truth it is ejected and put to
   flight.

   Jeremiah the prophet, gifted with consummate wisdom, [932] or rather
   the Holy Spirit in Jeremiah, exhibits God. "Am I a God at hand," he
   says, "and not a God afar off? Shall a man do ought in secret, and I
   not see him? Do I not fill heaven and earth? Saith the Lord." [933]

   And again by Isaiah, "Who shall measure heaven with a span, and the
   whole earth with his hand?" [934] Behold God's greatness, and be filled
   with amazement. Let us worship Him of whom the prophet says, "Before
   Thy face the hills shall melt, as wax melteth before the fire!" [935]
   This, says he, is the God "whose throne is heaven, and His footstool
   the earth; and if He open heaven, quaking will seize thee." [936] Will
   you hear, too, what this prophet says of idols? "And they shall be made
   a spectacle of in the face of the sun, and their carcases shall be meat
   for the fowls of heaven and the wild beasts of the earth; and they
   shall putrefy before the sun and the moon, which they have loved and
   served; and their city shall be burned down." [937] He says, too, that
   the elements and the world shall be destroyed. "The earth," he says,
   "shall grow old, and the heaven shall pass away; but the word of the
   Lord endureth for ever." What, then, when again God wishes to show
   Himself by Moses: "Behold ye, behold ye, that I Am, and there is no
   other God beside Me. I will kill, and I will make to live; I will
   strike, and I will heal; and there is none who shall deliver out of My
   hands." [938] But do you wish to hear another seer? You have the whole
   prophetic choir, the associates of Moses. What the Holy Spirit says by
   Hosea, I will not shrink from quoting: "Lo, I am He that appointeth the
   thunder, and createth spirit; and His hands have established the host
   of heaven." [939] And once more by Isaiah. And this utterance I will
   repeat: "I am," he says, "I am the Lord; I who speak righteousness,
   announce truth. Gather yourselves together, and come. Take counsel
   together, ye that are saved from the nations. They have not known, they
   who set up the block of wood, their carved work, and pray to gods who
   will not save them." [940] Then proceeding: "I am God, and there is not
   beside Me a just God, and a Saviour: there is none except Me. Turn to
   Me, and ye will be saved, ye that are from the end of the earth. I am
   God, and there is no other; by Myself I swear." [941] But against the
   worshippers of idols he is exasperated, saying, "To whom will ye liken
   the Lord, or to what likeness will ye compare Him? Has not the
   artificer made the image, or the goldsmith melted the gold and plated
   it with gold?" [942] --and so on. Be not therefore idolaters, but even
   now beware of the threatenings; "for the graven images and the works of
   men's hands shall wail, or rather they that trust in them," [943] for
   matter is devoid of sensation. Once more he says, "The Lord will shake
   the cities that are inhabited, and grasp the world in His hand like a
   nest." [944] Why repeat to you the mysteries of wisdom, and sayings
   from the writings of the son of the Hebrews, the master of wisdom? "The
   Lord created me the beginning of His ways, in order to His works."
   [945] And, "The Lord giveth wisdom, and from His face proceed knowledge
   and understanding." [946] "How long wilt thou lie in bed, O sluggard;
   and when wilt thou be aroused from sleep?" [947] "but if thou show
   thyself no sluggard, as a fountain thy harvest shall come," [948] the
   "Word of the Father, the benign light, the Lord that bringeth light,
   faith to all, and salvation." [949] For "the Lord who created the earth
   by His power," as Jeremiah says, "has raised up the world by His
   wisdom;" [950] for wisdom, which is His word, raises us up to the
   truth, who have fallen prostrate before idols, and is itself the first
   resurrection from our fall. Whence Moses, the man of God, dissuading
   from all idolatry, beautifully exclaims, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy
   God is one Lord; and thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and Him only
   shall thou serve." [951] "Now therefore be wise, O men," according to
   that blessed psalmist David; "lay hold on instruction, lest the Lord be
   angry, and ye perish from the way of righteousness, when His wrath has
   quickly kindled. Blessed are all they who put their trust in Him."
   [952] But already the Lord, in His surpassing pity, has inspired the
   song of salvation, sounding like a battle march, "Sons of men, how long
   will ye be slow of heart? Why do you love vanity, and seek after a
   lie?" [953] What, then, is the vanity, and what the lie? The holy
   apostle of the Lord, reprehending the Greeks, will show thee: "Because
   that, when they knew God, they glorified Him not as God, neither were
   thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and changed the glory
   of God into the likeness of corruptible man, and worshipped and served
   the creature more than the Creator." [954] And verily this is the God
   who "in the beginning made the heaven and the earth." [955] But you do
   not know God, and worship the heaven, and how shall you escape the
   guilt of impiety? Hear again the prophet speaking: "The sun, shall
   suffer eclipse, and the heaven be darkened; but the Almighty shall
   shine for ever: while the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, and
   the heavens stretched out and drawn together shall be rolled as a
   parchment-skin (for these are the prophetic expressions), and the earth
   shall flee away from before the face of the Lord." [956]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [930] [Note her remarkable accord with inspiration, clearly
   distinguishing between such and the oracles of God. But see, supra, p.
   132 and p. 145.]

   [931] [Having shown what truth there is to be found in heathen poets,
   he ascends to the Sibyl, and thus comes to the prophets; showing them
   how to climb upward in this way, and cleverly inducing them to make the
   best use of their own prophets and poets, by following them to the
   sources of their noblest ideas.]

   [932] [How sublimely he now introduces the oracles of truth.]

   [933] Jer. xxiii. 23.

   [934] Isa. xl. 12.

   [935] Isa. lxiv. 1, 2.

   [936] Isa. lxvi. 1.

   [937] Jer. viii. 2, xxx. 20, iv. 6.

   [938] Deut. xxxii. 39.

   [939] Amos iv. 13.

   [940] Isa. xlv. 19, 20.

   [941] Isa. xlv. 21-23.

   [942] Isa. xl. 18, 19.

   [943] Isa. x. 10, 11.

   [944] Isa. x. 14.

   [945] Prov. viii. 22.

   [946] Prov. ii. 6.

   [947] Prov. vi. 9.

   [948] Prov. vi. 11.

   [949] Prov. vi. 23.

   [950] Jer. x. 12.

   [951] Deut. vi. 4, 13, x. 20.

   [952] Ps. ii. 10, 12.

   [953] Ps. iv. 2.

   [954] Rom. i. 21, 23, 25.

   [955] Gen. i. 1.

   [956] This is made up of several passages, as Isa. xiii. 10, Ezek.
   xxxii. 7, Joel ii. 10, 31, iii. 15.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter IX.--"That Those Grievously Sin Who Despise or Neglect God's
      Gracious Calling."

   I could adduce ten thousand Scriptures of which not "one tittle shall
   pass away," [957] without being fulfilled; for the mouth of the Lord
   the Holy Spirit hath spoken these things. "Do not any longer," he says,
   "my son, despise the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
   rebuked of Him." [958] O surpassing love for man! Not as a teacher
   speaking to his pupils, not as a master to his domestics, nor as God to
   men, but as a father, does the Lord gently admonish his children. Thus
   Moses confesses that "he was filled with quaking and terror" [959]
   while he listened to God speaking concerning the Word. And art not thou
   afraid as thou hearest the voice of the Divine Word? Art not thou
   distressed? Do you not fear, and hasten to learn of Him,--that is, to
   salvation,--dreading wrath, loving grace, eagerly striving after the
   hope set before us, that you may shun the judgment threatened? Come,
   come, O my young people! For if you become not again as little
   children, and be born again, as saith the Scripture, you shall not
   receive the truly existent Father, nor shall you ever enter into the
   kingdom of heaven. For in what way is a stranger permitted to enter?
   Well, as I take it, then, when he is enrolled and made a citizen, and
   receives one to stand to him in the relation of father, then will he be
   occupied with the Father's concerns, then shall he be deemed worthy to
   be made His heir, then will he share the kingdom of the Father with His
   own dear Son. For this is the first-born Church, composed of many good
   children; these are "the first-born enrolled in heaven, who hold high
   festival with so many myriads of angels." We, too, are first-born sons,
   who are reared by God, who are the genuine friends of the First-born,
   who first of all other men attained to the knowledge of God, who first
   were wrenched away from our sins, first severed from the devil. And now
   the more benevolent God is, the more impious men are; for He desires us
   from slaves to become sons, while they scorn to become sons. O the
   prodigious folly of being ashamed of the Lord! He offers freedom, you
   flee into bondage; He bestows salvation, you sink down into
   destruction; He confers everlasting life, you wait for punishment, and
   prefer the fire which the Lord "has prepared for the devil and his
   angels." [960] Wherefore the blessed apostle says: "I testify in the
   Lord, that ye walk no longer as the Gentiles walk, in the vanity of
   their mind; having their understanding darkened, being alienated from
   the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
   hardness of their heart: who, being past feeling, have given themselves
   over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness and concupiscence."
   [961] After the accusation of such a witness, and his invocation of
   God, what else remains for the unbelieving than judgment and
   condemnation? And the Lord, with ceaseless assiduity, exhorts,
   terrifies, urges, rouses, admonishes; He awakes from the sleep of
   darkness, and raises up those who have wandered in error. "Awake," He
   says, "thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall
   give thee light," [962] --Christ, the Sun of the Resurrection, He "who
   was born before the morning star," [963] and with His beams bestows
   life. Let no one then despise the Word, lest he unwittingly despise
   himself. For the Scripture somewhere says, "To-day, if ye will hear His
   voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of
   temptation in the wilderness, when your fathers proved Me by trial."
   [964] And what was the trial? If you wish to learn, the Holy Spirit
   will show you: "And saw my works," He says, "forty years. Wherefore I
   was grieved with that generation, and said, They do always err in
   heart, and have not known My ways. So I sware in my wrath, they shall
   not enter into My rest." [965] Look to the threatening! Look to the
   exhortation! Look to the punishment! Why, then, should we any longer
   change grace into wrath, and not receive the word with open ears, and
   entertain God as a guest in pure spirits? For great is the grace of His
   promise, "if to-day we hear His voice." [966] And that to-day is
   lengthened out day by day, while it is called to-day. And to the end
   the to-day and the instruction continue; and then the true to-day, the
   never-ending day of God, extends over eternity. Let us then ever obey
   the voice of the divine word. For the to-day signifies eternity. And
   day is the symbol of light; and the light of men is the Word, by whom
   we behold God. Rightly, then, to those that have believed and obey,
   grace will superabound; while with those that have been unbelieving,
   and err in heart, and have not known the Lord's ways, which John
   commanded to make straight and to prepare, God is incensed, and those
   He threatens.

   And, indeed, the old Hebrew wanderers in the desert received typically
   the end of the threatening; for they are said not to have entered into
   the rest, because of unbelief, till, having followed the successor of
   Moses, they learned by experience, though late, that they could not be
   saved otherwise than by believing on Jesus. But the Lord, in His love
   to man, invites all men to the knowledge of the truth, and for this end
   sends the Paraclete. What, then, is this knowledge? Godliness; and
   "godliness," according to Paul, "is profitable for all things, having
   the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come."
   [967] If eternal salvation were to be sold, for how much, O men, would
   you propose to purchase it? Were one to estimate the value of the whole
   of Pactolus, the fabulous river of gold, he would not have reckoned up
   a price equivalent to salvation.

   Do not, however, faint. You may, if you choose, purchase salvation,
   though of inestimable value, with your own resources, love and living
   faith, which will be reckoned a suitable price. This recompense God
   cheerfully accepts; "for we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour
   of all men, especially of those who believe." [968]

   But the rest, round whom the world's growths have fastened, as the
   rocks on the sea-shore are covered over with sea-weed, make light of
   immortality, like the old man of Ithaca, eagerly longing to see, not
   the truth, not the fatherland in heaven, not the true light, but smoke.
   But godliness, that makes man as far as can be like God, designates God
   as our suitable teacher, who alone can worthily assimilate man to God.
   This teaching the apostle knows as truly divine. "Thou, O Timothy," he
   says, "from a child hast known the holy letters, which are able to make
   thee wise unto salvation, through faith that is in Christ Jesus." [969]
   For truly holy are those letters that sanctify and deify; and the
   writings or volumes that consist of those holy letters and syllables,
   the same apostle consequently calls "inspired of God, being profitable
   for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
   righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
   to every good work." [970] No one will be so impressed by the
   exhortations of any of the saints, as he is by the words of the Lord
   Himself, the lover of man. For this, and nothing but this, is His only
   work--the salvation of man. Therefore He Himself, urging them on to
   salvation, cries, "The kingdom of heaven is at hand." [971] Those men
   that draw near through fear, He converts. Thus also the apostle of the
   Lord, beseeching the Macedonians, becomes the interpreter of the divine
   voice, when he says, "The Lord is at hand; take care that ye be not
   apprehended empty." [972] But are ye so devoid of fear, or rather of
   faith, as not to believe the Lord Himself, or Paul, who in Christ's
   stead thus entreats: "Taste and see that Christ is God?" [973] Faith
   will lead you in; experience will teach you; Scripture will train you,
   for it says, "Come hither, O children; listen to me, and I will teach
   you the fear of the Lord." Then, as to those who already believe, it
   briefly adds, "What man is he that desireth life, that loveth to see
   good days?" [974] It is we, we shall say--we who are the devotees of
   good, we who eagerly desire good things. Hear, then, ye who are far
   off, hear ye who are near: the word has not been hidden from any; light
   is common, it shines "on all men." No one is a Cimmerian in respect to
   the word. Let us haste to salvation, to regeneration; let us who are
   many haste that we may be brought together into one love, according to
   the union of the essential unity; and let us, by being made good,
   conformably follow after union, seeking after the good Monad.

   The union of many in one, issuing in the production of divine harmony
   out of a medley of sounds and division, becomes one symphony following
   one choir-leader and teacher, [975] the Word, reaching and resting in
   the same truth, and crying Abba, Father. This, the true utterance of
   His children, God accepts with gracious welcome--the first-fruits He
   receives from them.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [957] Matt. v. 18.

   [958] Prov. iii. 11.

   [959] Heb. xii. 21.

   [960] Matt. xxv. 41, 46.

   [961] Eph. iv. 17-19.

   [962] Eph. v. 14.

   [963] Ps. cx. 3.

   [964] Ps. xcv. 8, 9.

   [965] Ps. xcv. 9-11

   [966] Ps. xcv. 7.

   [967] 1 Tim. iv. 8.

   [968] 1 Tim. iv. 10.

   [969] 2 Tim. iii. 15.

   [970] 2 Tim. iii. 16, 17. [Here note the testimony of Clement to the
   universal diffusion and study of the Scriptures.]

   [971] Matt. iv. 17.

   [972] Phil. iv. 5.

   [973] Ps. xxxiv. 8, where Clem. has read Christos for chrestos.

   [974] Ps. xxxiv. 11.

   [975] [Here seems to be a running allusion to the privileges of the
   Christian Church in its unity, and to the "Psalms and hymns and
   spiritual songs," which were so charming a feature of Christian
   worship. Bunsen, Hippolytus, etc., vol. ii. p. 157.]
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter X.--Answer to the Objection of the Heathen, that It Was Not Right
      to Abandon the Customs of Their Fathers.

   But you say it is not creditable to subvert the customs handed down to
   us from our fathers. And why, then, do we not still use our first
   nourishment, milk, to which our nurses accustomed us from the time of
   our birth? Why do we increase or diminish our patrimony, and not keep
   it exactly the same as we got it? Why do we not still vomit on our
   parents' breasts, or still do the things for which, when infants, and
   nursed by our mothers, we were laughed at, but have corrected
   ourselves, even if we did not fall in with good instructors? Then, if
   excesses in the indulgence of the passions, though pernicious and
   dangerous, yet are accompanied with pleasure, why do we not in the
   conduct of life abandon that usage which is evil, and provocative of
   passion, and godless, even should our fathers feel hurt, and betake
   ourselves to the truth, and seek Him who is truly our Father, rejecting
   custom as a deleterious drug? For of all that I have undertaken to do,
   the task I now attempt is the noblest, viz., to demonstrate to you how
   inimical this insane and most wretched custom is to godliness. For a
   boon so great, the greatest ever given by God to the human race, would
   never have been hated and rejected, had not you been carried away by
   custom, and then shut your ears against us; and just as unmanageable
   horses throw off the reins, and take the bit between their teeth, you
   rush away from the arguments addressed to you, in your eager desire to
   shake yourselves clear of us, who seek to guide the chariot of your
   life, and, impelled by your folly, dash towards the precipices of
   destruction, and regard the holy word of God as an accursed thing. The
   reward of your choice, therefore, as described by Sophocles, follows:--


   "The mind a blank, useless ears, vain thoughts."

   And you know not that, of all truths, this is the truest, that the good
   and godly shall obtain the good reward, inasmuch as they held goodness
   in high esteem; while, on the other hand, the wicked shall receive meet
   punishment. For the author of evil, torment has been prepared; and so
   the prophet Zecharias threatens him: "He that hath chosen Jerusalem
   rebuke thee; lo, is not this a brand plucked from the fire?" [976] What
   an infatuated desire, then, for voluntary death is this, rooted in
   men's minds! Why do they flee to this fatal brand, with which they
   shall be burned, when it is within their power to live nobly according
   to God, and not according to custom? For God bestows life freely; but
   evil custom, after our departure from this world, brings on the sinner
   unavailing remorse with punishment. By sad experience, even a child
   knows how superstition destroys and piety saves. Let any of you look at
   those who minister before the idols, their hair matted, their persons
   disgraced with filthy and tattered clothes; who never come near a bath,
   and let their nails grow to an extraordinary length, like wild beasts;
   many of them castrated, who show the idol's temples to be in reality
   graves or prisons. These appear to me to bewail the gods, not to
   worship them, and their sufferings to be worthy of pity rather than
   piety. And seeing these things, do you still continue blind, and will
   you not look up to the Ruler of all, the Lord of the universe? And will
   you not escape from those dungeons, and flee to the mercy that comes
   down from heaven? For God, of His great love to man, comes to the help
   of man, as the mother-bird flies to one of her young that has fallen
   out of the nest; and if a serpent open its mouth to swallow the little
   bird, "the mother flutters round, uttering cries of grief over her dear
   progeny;" [977] and God the Father seeks His creature, and heals his
   transgression, and pursues the serpent, and recovers the young one, and
   incites it to fly up to the nest.

   Thus dogs that have strayed, track out their master by the scent; and
   horses that have thrown their riders, come to their master's call if he
   but whistle. "The ox," it is said, "knoweth his owner, and the ass his
   master's crib; but Israel hath not known Me." [978] What, then, of the
   Lord? He remembers not our ill desert; He still pities, He still urges
   us to repentance.

   And I would ask you, if it does not appear to you monstrous, that you
   men who are God's handiwork, who have received your souls from Him, and
   belong wholly to God, should be subject to another master, and, what is
   more, serve the tyrant instead of the rightful King--the evil one
   instead of the good? For, in the name of truth, what man in his senses
   turns his back on good, and attaches himself to evil? What, then, is he
   who flees from God to consort with demons? Who, that may become a son
   of God, prefers to be in bondage? Or who is he that pursues his way to
   Erebus, when it is in his power to be a citizen of heaven, and to
   cultivate Paradise, and walk about in heaven and partake of the tree of
   life and immortality, and, cleaving his way through the sky in the
   track of the luminous cloud, behold, like Elias, the rain of salvation?
   Some there are, who, like worms wallowing in marshes and mud in the
   streams of pleasure, feed on foolish and useless delights--swinish men.
   For swine, it is said, like mud better than pure water; and, according
   to Democritus, "doat upon dirt."

   Let us not then be enslaved or become swinish; but, as true children of
   the light, let us raise our eyes and look on the light, lest the Lord
   discover us to be spurious, as the sun does the eagles. Let us
   therefore repent, and pass from ignorance to knowledge, from
   foolishness to wisdom, from licentiousness to self-restraint, from
   unrighteousness to righteousness, from godlessness to God. It is an
   enterprise of noble daring to take our way to God; and the enjoyment of
   many other good things is within the reach of the lovers of
   righteousness, who pursue eternal life, specially those things to which
   God Himself alludes, speaking by Isaiah: "There is an inheritance for
   those who serve the Lord." [979] Noble and desirable is this
   inheritance: not gold, not silver, not raiment, which the moth assails,
   and things of earth which are assailed by the robber, whose eye is
   dazzled by worldly wealth; but it is that treasure of salvation to
   which we must hasten, by becoming lovers of the Word. Thence
   praise-worthy works descend to us, and fly with us on the wing of
   truth. This is the inheritance with which the eternal covenant of God
   invests us, conveying the everlasting gift of grace; and thus our
   loving Father--the true Father--ceases not to exhort, admonish, train,
   love us. For He ceases not to save, and advises the best course:
   "Become righteous," says the Lord. [980] Ye that thirst, come to the
   water; and ye that have no money, come, and buy and drink without
   money. [981] He invites to the laver, to salvation, to illumination,
   all but crying out and saying, The land I give thee, and the sea, my
   child, and heaven too; and all the living creatures in them I freely
   bestow upon thee. Only, O child, thirst for thy Father; God shall be
   revealed to thee without price; the truth is not made merchandise of.
   He gives thee all creatures that fly and swim, and those on the land.
   These the Father has created for thy thankful enjoyment. What the
   bastard, who is a son of perdition, foredoomed to be the slave of
   mammon, has to buy for money, He assigns to thee as thine own, even to
   His own son who loves the Father; for whose sake He still works, and to
   whom alone He promises, saying, "The land shall not be sold in
   perpetuity," for it is not destined to corruption. "For the whole land
   is mine;" and it is thine too, if thou receive God. Wherefore the
   Scripture, as might have been expected, proclaims good news to those
   who have believed. "The saints of the Lord shall inherit the glory of
   God and His power." What glory, tell me, O blessed One, which "eye hath
   not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart of man;"
   [982] and "they shall be glad in the kingdom of their Lord for ever and
   ever! Amen." You have, O men, the divine promise of grace; you have
   heard, on the other hand, the threatening of punishment: by these the
   Lord saves, teaching men by fear and grace. Why do we delay? Why do we
   not shun the punishment? Why do we not receive the free gift? Why, in
   fine, do we not choose the better part, God instead of the evil one,
   and prefer wisdom to idolatry, and take life in exchange for death?
   "Behold," He says, "I have set before your face death and life." [983]
   The Lord tries you, that "you may choose life." He counsels you as a
   father to obey God. "For if ye hear Me," He says, "and be willing, ye
   shall eat the good things of the land:" [984] this is the grace
   attached to obedience. "But if ye obey Me not, and are unwilling, the
   sword and fire shall devour you:" [985] this is the penalty of
   disobedience. For the mouth of the Lord--the law of truth, the word of
   the Lord--hath spoken these things. Are you willing that I should be
   your good counsellor? Well, do you hear. I, if possible, will explain.
   You ought, O men, when reflecting on the Good, to have brought forward
   a witness inborn and competent, viz., faith, which of itself, and from
   its own resources, chooses at once what is best, instead of occupying
   yourselves in painfully inquiring whether what is best ought to be
   followed. For, allow me to tell you, you ought to doubt whether you
   should get drunk, but you get drunk before reflecting on the matter;
   and whether you ought to do an injury, but you do injury with the
   utmost readiness. The only thing you make the subject of question is,
   whether God should be worshipped, and whether this wise God and Christ
   should be followed: and this you think requires deliberation and doubt,
   and know not what is worthy of God. Have faith in us, as you have in
   drunkenness, that you may be wise; have faith in us, as you have in
   injury, that you may live. But if, acknowledging the conspicuous
   trustworthiness of the virtues, you wish to trust them, come and I will
   set before you in abundance, materials of persuasion respecting the
   Word. But do you--for your ancestral customs, by which your minds are
   preoccupied, divert you from the truth,--do you now hear what is the
   real state of the case as follows.

   And let not any shame of this name preoccupy you, which does great harm
   to men, and seduces them from salvation. Let us then openly strip for
   the contest, and nobly strive in the arena of truth, the holy Word
   being the judge, and the Lord of the universe prescribing the contest.
   For 'tis no insignificant prize, the guerdon of immortality which is
   set before us. Pay no more regard, then, if you are rated by some of
   the low rabble who lead the dance of impiety, and are driven on to the
   same pit by their folly and insanity, makers of idols and worshippers
   of stones. For these have dared to deify men,--Alexander of Macedon,
   for example, whom they canonized as the thirteenth god, whose
   pretensions Babylon confuted, which showed him dead. I admire,
   therefore, the divine sophist. Theocritus was his name. After
   Alexander's death, Theocritus, holding up the vain opinions entertained
   by men respecting the gods, to ridicule before his fellow-citizens,
   said: "Men, keep up your hearts as long as you see the gods dying
   sooner than men." And, truly, he who worships gods that are visible,
   and the promiscuous rabble of creatures begotten and born, and attaches
   himself to them, is a far more wretched object than the very demons.
   For God is by no manner of means unrighteous, as the demons are, but in
   the very highest degree righteous; and nothing more resembles God than
   one of us when he becomes righteous in the highest possible degree:--


   "Go into the way, the whole tribe of you handicrafts-men,

   Who worship Jove's fierce-eyed daughter, [986] the working goddess,

   With fans duly placed, fools that ye are"--

   fashioners of stones, and worshippers of them. Let your Phidias, and
   Polycletus, and your Praxiteles and Apelles too, come, and all that are
   engaged in mechanical arts, who, being themselves of the earth, are
   workers of the earth. "For then," says a certain prophecy, "the affairs
   here turn out unfortunately, when men put their trust in images." Let
   the meaner artists, too--for I will not stop calling--come. None of
   these ever made a breathing image, or out of earth moulded soft flesh.
   Who liquefied the marrow? or who solidified the bones? Who stretched
   the nerves? who distended the veins? Who poured the blood into them? Or
   who spread the skin? Who ever could have made eyes capable of seeing?
   Who breathed spirit into the lifeless form? Who bestowed righteousness?
   Who promised immortality? The Maker of the universe alone; the Great
   Artist and Father has formed us, such a living image as man is. But
   your Olympian Jove, the image of an image, greatly out of harmony with
   truth, is the senseless work of Attic hands. For the image of God is
   His Word, the genuine Son of Mind, the Divine Word, the archetypal
   light of light; and the image of the Word is the true man, the mind
   which is in man, who is therefore said to have been made "in the image
   and likeness of God," [987] assimilated to the Divine Word in the
   affections of the soul, and therefore rational; but effigies sculptured
   in human form, the earthly image of that part of man which is visible
   and earth-born, are but a perishable impress of humanity, manifestly
   wide of the truth. That life, then, which is occupied with so much
   earnestness about matter, seems to me to be nothing else than full of
   insanity. And custom, which has made you taste bondage and unreasonable
   care, is fostered by vain opinion; and ignorance, which has proved to
   the human race the cause of unlawful rites and delusive shows, and also
   of deadly plagues and hateful images, has, by devising many shapes of
   demons, stamped on all that follow it the mark of long-continued death.
   Receive, then, the water of the word; wash, ye polluted ones; purify
   yourselves from custom, by sprinkling yourselves with the drops of
   truth. [988] The pure must ascend to heaven. Thou art a man, if we look
   to that which is most common to thee and others--seek Him who created
   thee; thou art a son, if we look to that which is thy peculiar
   prerogative--acknowledge thy Father. But do you still continue in your
   sins, engrossed with pleasures? To whom shall the Lord say, "Yours is
   the kingdom of heaven?" Yours, whose choice is set on God, if you will;
   yours, if you will only believe, and comply with the brief terms of the
   announcement; which the Ninevites having obeyed, instead of the
   destruction they looked for, obtained a signal deliverance. How, then,
   may I ascend to heaven, is it said? The Lord is the way; a strait way,
   but leading from heaven, strait in truth, but leading back to heaven,
   strait, despised on earth; broad, adored in heaven.

   Then, he that is uninstructed in the word, has ignorance as the excuse
   of his error; but as for him into whose ears instruction has been
   poured, and who deliberately maintains his incredulity in his soul, the
   wiser he appears to be, the more harm will his understanding do him;
   for he has his own sense as his accuser for not having chosen the best
   part. For man has been otherwise constituted by nature, so as to have
   fellowship with God. As, then, we do not compel the horse to plough, or
   the bull to hunt, but set each animal to that for which it is by nature
   fitted; so, placing our finger on what is man's peculiar and
   distinguishing characteristic above other creatures, we invite
   him--born, as he is, for the contemplation of heaven, and being, as he
   is, a truly heavenly plant--to the knowledge of God, counselling him to
   furnish himself with what is his sufficient provision for eternity,
   namely piety. Practise husbandry, we say, if you are a husbandman; but
   while you till your fields, know God. Sail the sea, you who are devoted
   to navigation, yet call the whilst on the heavenly Pilot. [989] Has
   knowledge taken hold of you while engaged in military service? Listen
   to the commander, who orders what is right. As those, then, who have
   been overpowered with sleep and drunkenness, do ye awake; and using
   your eyes a little, consider what mean those stones which you worship,
   and the expenditure you frivolously lavish on matter. Your means and
   substance you squander on ignorance, even as you throw away your lives
   to death, having found no other end of your vain hope than this. Not
   only unable to pity yourselves, you are incapable even of yielding to
   the persuasions of those who commiserate you; enslaved as you are to
   evil custom, and, clinging to it voluntarily till your last breath, you
   are hurried to destruction: "because light is come into the world, and
   men have loved the darkness rather than the light," [990] while they
   could sweep away those hindrances to salvation, pride, and wealth, and
   fear, repeating this poetic utterance:--


   "Whither do I bear these abundant riches? and whither

   Do I myself wander?" [991]

   If you wish, then, to cast aside these vain phantasies, and bid adieu
   to evil custom, say to vain opinion:--


   "Lying dreams, farewell; you were then nothing."

   For what, think you, O men, is the Hermes of Typho, and that of
   Andocides, and that of Amyetus? Is it not evident to all that they are
   stones, as is the veritable Hermes himself? As the Halo is not a god,
   and as the Iris is not a god, but are states of the atmosphere and of
   the clouds; and as, likewise, a day is not a god, nor a year, nor time,
   which is made up of these, so neither is sun nor moon, by which each of
   those mentioned above is determined. Who, then, in his right senses,
   can imagine Correction, and Punishment, and Justice, and Retribution to
   be gods? For neither the Furies, nor the Fates, nor Destiny are gods,
   since neither Government, nor Glory, nor Wealth are gods, which last
   [as Plutus] painters represent as blind. But if you deify Modesty, and
   Love, and Venus, let these be followed by Infamy, and Passion, and
   Beauty, and Intercourse. Therefore Sleep and Death cannot reasonably
   any more be regarded as twin deities, being merely changes which take
   place naturally in living creatures; no more will you with propriety
   call Fortune, or Destiny, or the Fates goddesses. And if Strife and
   Battle be not gods, no more are Ares and Enyo. Still further, if the
   lightnings, and thunderbolts, and rains are not gods, how can fire and
   water be gods? how can shooting stars and comets, which are produced by
   atmospheric changes? He who calls Fortune a god, let him also so call
   Action. If, then, none of these, nor of the images formed by human
   hands, and destitute of feeling, is held to be a God, while a
   providence exercised about us is evidently the result of a divine
   power, [992] it remains only to acknowledge this, that He alone who is
   truly God, only truly is and subsists. But those who are insensible to
   this are like men who have drunk mandrake or some other drug. May God
   grant that you may at length awake from this slumber, and know God; and
   that neither Gold, nor Stone, nor Tree, nor Action, nor Suffering, nor
   Disease, nor Fear, may appear in your eyes as a god. For there are, in
   sooth, "on the fruitful earth thrice ten thousand" demons, not
   immortal, nor indeed mortal; for they are not endowed with sensation,
   so as to render them capable of death, but only things of wood and
   stone, that hold despotic sway over men insulting and violating life
   through the force of custom. "The earth is the Lord's," it is said,
   "and the fulness thereof." [993] Then why darest thou, while
   luxuriating in the bounties of the Lord, to ignore the Sovereign Ruler?
   "Leave my earth," the Lord will say to thee. "Touch not the water which
   I bestow. Partake not of the fruits of the earth produced by my
   husbandry." Give to God recompense for your sustenance; acknowledge thy
   Master. Thou art God's creature. What belongs to Him, how can it with
   justice be alienated? For that which is alienated, being deprived of
   the properties that belonged to it, is also deprived of truth. For,
   after the fashion of Niobe, or, to express myself more mystically, like
   the Hebrew woman called by the ancients Lot's wife, are ye not turned
   into a state of insensibility? This woman, we have heard, was turned
   into stone for her love of Sodom. And those who are godless, addicted
   to impiety, hard-hearted and foolish, are Sodomites. Believe that these
   utterances are addressed to you from God. For think not that stones,
   and stocks, and birds, and serpents are sacred things, and men are not;
   but, on the contrary, regard men as truly sacred, [994] and take beasts
   and stones for what they are. For there are miserable wretches of human
   kind, who consider that God utters His voice by the raven and the
   jackdaw, but says nothing by man; and honour the raven as a messenger
   of God. But the man of God, who croaks not, nor chatters, but speaks
   rationally and instructs lovingly, alas, they persecute; and while he
   is inviting them to cultivate righteousness, they try inhumanly to slay
   him, neither welcoming the grace which comes from above, nor fearing
   the penalty. For they believe not God, nor understand His power, whose
   love to man is ineffable; and His hatred of evil is inconceivable. His
   anger augments punishment against sin; His love bestows blessings on
   repentance. It is the height of wretchedness to be deprived of the help
   which comes from God. Hence this blindness of eyes and dulness of
   hearing are more grievous than other inflictions of the evil one; for
   the one deprives them of heavenly vision, the other robs them of divine
   instruction. But ye, thus maimed as respects the truth, blind in mind,
   deaf in understanding, are not grieved, are not pained, have had no
   desire to see heaven and the Maker of heaven, nor, by fixing your
   choice on salvation, have sought to hear the Creator of the universe,
   and to learn of Him; for no hindrance stands in the way of him who is
   bent on the knowledge of God. Neither childlessness, nor poverty, nor
   obscurity, nor want, can hinder him who eagerly strives after the
   knowledge of God; nor does any one who has conquered [995] by brass or
   iron the true wisdom for himself choose to exchange it, for it is
   vastly preferred to everything else. Christ is able to save in every
   place. For he that is fired with ardour and admiration for
   righteousness, being the lover of One who needs nothing, needs himself
   but little, having treasured up his bliss in nothing but himself and
   God, where is neither moth, [996] robber, nor pirate, but the eternal
   Giver of good. With justice, then, have you been compared to those
   serpents who shut their ears against the charmers. For "their mind,"
   says the Scripture, "is like the serpent, like the deaf adder, which
   stoppeth her ear, and will not hear the voice of the charmers." [997]
   But allow yourselves to feel the influence of the charming strains of
   sanctity, and receive that mild word of ours, and reject the deadly
   poison, that it may be granted to you to divest yourselves as much as
   possible of destruction, as they [998] have been divested of old age.
   Hear me, and do not stop your ears; do not block up the avenues of
   hearing, but lay to heart what is said. Excellent is the medicine of
   immortality! Stop at length your grovelling reptile motions. [999] "For
   the enemies of the Lord," says Scripture, "shall lick the dust." [1000]
   Raise your eyes from earth to the skies, look up to heaven, admire the
   sight, cease watching with outstretched head the heel of the righteous,
   and hindering the way of truth. Be wise and harmless. Perchance the
   Lord will endow you with the wing of simplicity (for He has resolved to
   give wings to those that are earth-born), that you may leave your holes
   and dwell in heaven. Only let us with our whole heart repent, that we
   may be able with our whole heart to contain God. "Trust in Him, all ye
   assembled people; pour out all your hearts before Him." [1001] He says
   to those that have newly abandoned wickedness, "He pities them, and
   fills them with righteousness." Believe Him who is man and God;
   believe, O man. Believe, O man, the living God, who suffered and is
   adored. Believe, ye slaves, [1002] Him who died; believe, all ye of
   human kind, Him who alone is God of all men. Believe, and receive
   salvation as your reward. Seek God, and your soul shall live. He who
   seeks God is busying himself about his own salvation. Hast thou found
   God?--then thou hast life. Let us then seek, in order that we may live.
   The reward of seeking is life with God. "Let all who seek Thee be glad
   and rejoice in Thee; and let them say continually, God be magnified."
   [1003] A noble hymn of God is an immortal man, established in
   righteousness, in whom the oracles of truth are engraved. For where but
   in a soul that is wise can you write truth? where love? where
   reverence? where meekness? Those who have had these divine characters
   impressed on them, ought, I think, to regard wisdom as a fair port
   whence to embark, to whatever lot in life they turn; and likewise to
   deem it the calm haven of salvation: wisdom, by which those who have
   betaken themselves to the Father, have proved good fathers to their
   children; and good parents to their sons, those who have known the Son;
   and good husbands to their wives, those who remember the Bridegroom;
   and good masters to their servants, [1004] those who have been redeemed
   from utter slavery. Oh, happier far the beasts than men involved in
   error! who live in ignorance as you, but do not counterfeit the truth.
   There are no tribes of flatterers among them. Fishes have no
   superstition: the birds worship not a single image; only they look with
   admiration on heaven, since, deprived as they are of reason, they are
   unable to know God. So are you not ashamed for living through so many
   periods of life in impiety, making yourselves more irrational than
   irrational creatures? You were boys, then striplings, then youths, then
   men, but never as yet were you good. If you have respect for old age,
   be wise, now that you have reached life's sunset; and albeit at the
   close of life, acquire the knowledge of God, that the end of life may
   to you prove the beginning of salvation. You have become old in
   superstition; as young, enter on the practice of piety. God regards you
   as innocent children. Let, then, the Athenian follow the laws of Solon,
   and the Argive those of Phoroneus, and the Spartan those of Lycurgus:
   but if thou enrol thyself as one of God's people, heaven is thy
   country, God thy lawgiver. And what are the laws? "Thou shalt not kill;
   thou shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt not seduce boys; thou shalt
   not steal; thou shalt not bear false witness; thou shalt love the Lord
   thy God." [1005] And the complements of these are those laws of reason
   and words of sanctity which are inscribed on men's hearts: "Thou shalt
   love thy neighbour as thyself; to him who strikes thee on the cheek,
   present also the other;" [1006] "thou shalt not lust, for by lust alone
   thou hast committed adultery." [1007] How much better, therefore, is it
   for men from the beginning not to wish to desire things forbidden, than
   to obtain their desires! But ye are not able to endure the austerity of
   salvation; but as we delight in sweet things, and prize them higher for
   the agreeableness of the pleasure they yield, while, on the other hand,
   those bitter things which are distasteful to the palate are curative
   and healing, and the harshness of medicines strengthens people of weak
   stomach, thus custom pleases and tickles; but custom pushes into the
   abyss, while truth conducts to heaven. Harsh it is at first, but a good
   nurse of youth; and it is at once the decorous place where the
   household maids and matrons dwell together, and the sage
   council-chamber. Nor is it difficult to approach, or impossible to
   attain, but is very near us in our very homes; as Moses, endowed with
   all wisdom, says, while referring to it, it has its abode in three
   departments of our constitution--in the hands, the mouth, and the
   heart: a meet emblem this of truth, which is embraced by these three
   things in all--will, action, speech. And be not afraid lest the
   multitude of pleasing objects which rise before you withdraw you from
   wisdom. You yourself will spontaneously surmount the frivolousness of
   custom, as boys when they have become men throw aside their toys. For
   with a celerity unsurpassable, and a benevolence to which we have ready
   access, the divine power, casting its radiance on the earth, hath
   filled the universe with the seed of salvation. For it was not without
   divine care that so great a work was accomplished in so brief a space
   by the Lord, who, though despised as to appearance, was in reality
   adored, the expiator of sin, the Saviour, the clement, the Divine Word,
   He that is truly most manifest Deity, He that is made equal to the Lord
   of the universe; because He was His Son, and the Word was in God, not
   disbelieved in by all when He was first preached, nor altogether
   unknown when, assuming the character of man, and fashioning Himself in
   flesh, He enacted the drama of human salvation: for He was a true
   champion and a fellow-champion with the creature. And being
   communicated most speedily to men, having dawned from His Father's
   counsel quicker than the sun, with the most perfect ease He made God
   shine on us. Whence He was and what He was, He showed by what He taught
   and exhibited, manifesting Himself as the Herald of the Covenant, the
   Reconciler, our Saviour, the Word, the Fount of life, the Giver of
   peace, diffused over the whole face of the earth; by whom, so to speak,
   the universe has already become an ocean of blessings. [1008]
     __________________________________________________________________

   [976] Zech. iii. 2.

   [977] Iliad, ii. 315.

   [978] Isa. i. 3.

   [979] Isa. liv. 17.

   [980] Isa. liv. 17, where Sept. reads, "ye shall be righteous."

   [981] Isa. lv. 1.

   [982] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [983] Deut. xxx. 15.

   [984] Isa. i. 19.

   [985] Isa. i. 20, xxxiii. 11.

   [986] Minerva.

   [987] Gen. i. 26.

   [988] [Immersion was surely the form of primitive baptism, but these
   words, if not a reference to that sacrament, must recall Isa. lii. 15.]

   [989] [This fine passage will be recalled by what Clement afterward, in
   the Stromata, says of prayer. Book vii. vol. ii. p. 432. Edin.]

   [990] John iii. 19.

   [991] Odyss., xiii. 203.

   [992] A translation in accordance with the Latin version would run
   thus: "While a certain previous conception of divine power is
   nevertheless discovered within us." But adopting that in the text the
   argument is: there is unquestionably a providence implying the exertion
   of divine power. That power is not exercised by idols or heathen gods.
   The only other alternative is, that it is exercised by the one
   self-existent God.

   [993] Ps. xxiv. 1; 1 Cor. x. 26, 28.

   [994] [1 Pet. ii. 17. This appeal in behalf of the sanctity of man as
   man, shows the workings of the apostolic precept.]

   [995] The expression "conquered by brass or iron" is borrowed from
   Homer (Il., viii. 534). Brass, or copper, and iron were the metals of
   which arms were made.

   [996] Matt. vi. 20, 21.

   [997] Ps. lviii. 4, 5. [It was supposed that adders deafened themselves
   by laying one ear on the earth, and closing the other with the tail.]

   [998] "They" seems to refer to sanctity and the word.

   [999] Ps. lviii. 4, 5. [It was supposed that adders deafened themselves
   by laying one ear on the earth, and closing the other with the tail.]

   [1000] Ps. lxxii. 9.

   [1001] Ps. lxii. 8.

   [1002] [The impact of the Gospel on the slavery and helotism of the
   Pagans.]

   [1003] Ps. lxx. 4.

   [1004] [See above, p. 201, and below, the command "thou shalt love thy
   neighbor."]

   [1005] Ex. xx. 13-16; Deut. vi. 5.

   [1006] Luke vi. 29.

   [1007] Matt. v. 28.

   [1008] [Good will to men made emphatic. Slavery already modified,
   free-schools established, and homes created. As soon as persecution
   ceased, we find the Christian hospital. Forster ascribes the first
   foundation of this kind to Ephraim Syrus. A friend refers me to his
   Mohammedanism Unveiled, vol. i. p. 283.]
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter XI.--How Great are the Benefits Conferred on Man Through the
      Advent of Christ.

   Contemplate a little, if agreeable to you, the divine beneficence. The
   first man, when in Paradise, sported free, because he was the child of
   God; but when he succumbed to pleasure (for the serpent allegorically
   signifies pleasure crawling on its belly, earthly wickedness nourished
   for fuel to the flames), was as a child seduced by lusts, and grew old
   in disobedience; and by disobeying his Father, dishonoured God. Such
   was the influence of pleasure. Man, that had been free by reason of
   simplicity, was found fettered to sins. The Lord then wished to release
   him from his bonds, and clothing Himself with flesh--O divine
   mystery!--vanquished the serpent, and enslaved the tyrant death; and,
   most marvellous of all, man that had been deceived by pleasure, and
   bound fast by corruption, had his hands unloosed, and was set free. O
   mystic wonder! The Lord was laid low, and man rose up; and he that fell
   from Paradise receives as the reward of obedience something greater
   [than Paradise]--namely, heaven itself. Wherefore, since the Word
   Himself has come to us from heaven, we need not, I reckon, go any more
   in search of human learning to Athens and the rest of Greece, and to
   Ionia. For if we have as our teacher Him that filled the universe with
   His holy energies in creation, salvation, beneficence, legislation,
   prophecy, teaching, we have the Teacher from whom all instruction
   comes; and the whole world, with Athens and Greece, has already become
   the domain of the Word. [1009] For you, who believed the poetical fable
   which designated Minos the Cretan as the bosom friend of Zeus, will not
   refuse to believe that we who have become the disciples of God have
   received the only true wisdom; and that which the chiefs of philosophy
   only guessed at, the disciples of Christ have both apprehended and
   proclaimed. And the one whole Christ is not divided: "There is neither
   barbarian, nor Jew, nor Greek, neither male nor female, but a new man,"
   [1010] transformed by God's Holy Spirit. Further, the other counsels
   and precepts are unimportant, and respect particular things,--as, for
   example, if one may marry, take part in public affairs, beget children;
   but the only command that is universal, and over the whole course of
   existence, at all times and in all circumstances, tends to the highest
   end, viz., life, is piety, [1011] --all that is necessary, in order
   that we may live for ever, being that we live in accordance with it.
   Philosophy, however, as the ancients say, is "a long-lived exhortation,
   wooing the eternal love of wisdom;" while the commandment of the Lord
   is far-shining, "enlightening the eyes." Receive Christ, receive sight,
   receive thy light,


   "In order that you may know well both God and man." [1012]

   "Sweet is the Word that gives us light, precious above gold and gems;
   it is to be desired above honey and the honey-comb." [1013] For how can
   it be other than desirable, since it has filled with light the mind
   which had been buried in darkness, and given keenness to the
   "light-bringing eyes" of the soul? For just as, had the sun not been in
   existence, night would have brooded over the universe notwithstanding
   the other luminaries of heaven; so, had we nor known the Word, and been
   illuminated by Him; we should have been nowise different from fowls
   that are being fed, fattened in darkness, and nourished for death. Let
   us then admit the light, that we may admit God; let us admit the light,
   and become disciples to the Lord. This, too, He has been promised to
   the Father: "I will declare Thy name to my brethren; in the midst of
   the Church will I praise Thee." [1014] Praise and declare to me Thy
   Father God; Thy utterances save; Thy hymn teaches [1015] that hitherto
   I have wandered in error, seeking God. But since Thou leadest me to the
   light, O Lord, and I find God through Thee, and receive the Father from
   Thee, I become "Thy fellow-heir," [1016] since Thou "wert not ashamed
   of me as Thy brother." [1017] Let us put away, then, let us put away
   oblivion of the truth, viz., ignorance; and removing the darkness which
   obstructs, as dimness of sight, let us contemplate the only true God,
   first raising our voice in this hymn of praise: [1018] Hail, O light!
   For in us, buried in darkness, shut up in the shadow of death, light
   has shone forth from heaven, purer than the sun, sweeter than life here
   below. That light is eternal life; and whatever partakes of it lives.
   But night fears the light, and hiding itself in terror, gives place to
   the day of the Lord. Sleepless light is now over all, and the west has
   given credence to the east. For this was the end of the new creation.
   For "the Sun of Righteousness," who drives His chariot over all,
   pervades equally all humanity, like "His Father, who makes His sun to
   rise on all men," and distils on them the dew of the truth. He hath
   changed sunset into sunrise, and through the cross brought death to
   life; and having wrenched man from destruction, He hath raised him to
   the skies, transplanting mortality into immortality, and translating
   earth to heaven--He, the husbandman of God,


   "Pointing out the favourable signs and rousing the nations

   To good works, putting them in mind of the true sustenance;" [1019]

   having bestowed on us the truly great, divine, and inalienable
   inheritance of the Father, deifying man by heavenly teaching, putting
   His laws into our minds, and writing them on our hearts. What laws does
   He inscribe? "That all shall know God, from small to great;" and, "I
   will be merciful to them," says God, "and will not remember their
   sins." [1020] Let us receive the laws of life, let us comply with God's
   expostulations; let us become acquainted with Him, that He may be
   gracious. And though God needs nothing let us render to Him the
   grateful recompense of a thankful heart and of piety, as a kind of
   house-rent for our dwelling here below.


   "Gold for brass,

   A hundred oxen's worth for that of nine;" [1021]

   that is, for your little faith He gives you the earth of so great
   extent to till, water to drink and also to sail on, air to breathe,
   fire to do your work, a world to dwell in; and He has permitted you to
   conduct a colony from here to heaven: with these important works of His
   hand, and benefits in such numbers, He has rewarded your little faith.
   Then, those who have put faith in necromancers, receive from them
   amulets and charms, to ward off evil forsooth; and will you not allow
   the heavenly Word, the Saviour, to be bound on to you as an amulet,
   and, by trusting in God's own charm, be delivered from passions which
   are the diseases of the mind, and rescued from sin?--for sin is eternal
   death. Surely utterly dull and blind, and, like moles, doing nothing
   but eat, you spend your lives in darkness, surrounded with corruption.
   But it is truth which cries, "The light shall shine forth from the
   darkness." Let the light then shine in the hidden part of man, that is,
   the heart; and let the beams of knowledge arise to reveal and irradiate
   the hidden inner man, the disciple of the Light, the familiar friend
   and fellow-heir of Christ; especially now that we have come to know the
   most precious and venerable name of the good Father, who to a pious and
   good child gives gentle counsels, and commands what is salutary for His
   child. He who obeys Him has the advantage in all things, follows God,
   obeys the Father, knows Him through wandering, loves God, loves his
   neighbour, fulfils the commandment, seeks the prize, claims the
   promise. But it has been God's fixed and constant purpose to save the
   flock of men: for this end the good God sent the good Shepherd. And the
   Word, having unfolded the truth, showed to men the height of salvation,
   that either repenting they might be saved, or refusing to obey, they
   might be judged. This is the proclamation of righteousness: to those
   that obey, glad tidings; to those that disobey, judgment. The loud
   trumpet, when sounded, collects the soldiers, and proclaims war. And
   shall not Christ, breathing a strain of peace to the ends of the earth,
   gather together His own soldiers, the soldiers of peace? Well, by His
   blood, and by the word, He has gathered the bloodless host of peace,
   and assigned to them the kingdom of heaven. The trumpet of Christ is
   His Gospel. He hath blown it, and we have heard. "Let us array
   ourselves in the armour of peace, putting on the breastplate of
   righteousness, and taking the shield of faith, and binding our brows
   with the helmet of salvation; and the sword of the Spirit, which is the
   word of God," [1022] let us sharpen. So the apostle in the spirit of
   peace commands. These are our invulnerable weapons: armed with these,
   let us face the evil one; "the fiery darts of the evil one" let us
   quench with the sword-points dipped in water, that, have been baptized
   by the Word, returning grateful thanks for the benefits we have
   received, and honouring God through the Divine Word. "For while thou
   art yet speaking," it is said, "He will say, Behold, I am beside thee."
   [1023] O this holy and blessed power, by which God has fellowship with
   men! Better far, then, is it to become at once the imitator and the
   servant of the best of all beings; for only by holy service will any
   one be able to imitate God, and to serve and worship Him only by
   imitating Him. The heavenly and truly divine love comes to men thus,
   when in the soul itself the spark of true goodness, kindled in the soul
   by the Divine Word, is able to burst forth into flame; and, what is of
   the highest importance, salvation runs parallel with sincere
   willingness--choice and life being, so to speak, yoked together.
   Wherefore this exhortation of the truth alone, like the most faithful
   of our friends, abides with us till our last breath, and is to the
   whole and perfect spirit of the soul the kind attendant on our ascent
   to heaven. What, then, is the exhortation I give you? I urge you to be
   saved. This Christ desires. In one word, He freely bestows life on you.
   And who is He? Briefly learn. The Word of truth, the Word of
   incorruption, that regenerates man by bringing him back to the
   truth--the goad that urges to salvation--He who expels destruction and
   pursues death--He who builds up the temple of God in men, that He may
   cause God to take up His abode in men. Cleanse the temple; and
   pleasures and amusements abandon to the winds and the fire, as a fading
   flower; but wisely cultivate the fruits of self-command, and present
   thyself to God as an offering of first-fruits, that there may be not
   the work alone, but also the grace of God; and both are requisite, that
   the friend of Christ may be rendered worthy of the kingdom, and be
   counted worthy of the kingdom.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1009] [The Catholic instinct is here; and an all-embracing benevolence
   is its characteristic, not worldly empire.]

   [1010] Gal. iii. 28, vi. 15.

   [1011] [He seems to be thinking of 1 Tim. vi. 6, and 1 Tim. iv. 8.]

   [1012] Iliad, v. 128.

   [1013] Ps. xix. 10.

   [1014] Ps. xxii. 22.

   [1015] [Eph. v. 14, is probably from a hymn of the Church, which is
   here referred to as His, as it is adopted into Scripture.]

   [1016] Rom. viii. 17.

   [1017] Heb. ii. 11.

   [1018] [A quotation from another hymn, in all probability.]

   [1019] Aratus.

   [1020] Heb. viii. 10-12; Jer. xxxi. 33, 34.

   [1021] Il., vi. 236. [The exchange of Glaucus.]

   [1022] Eph. vi. 14-17.

   [1023] Isa. lviii. 9.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter XII.--Exhortation to Abandon Their Old Errors and Listen to the
      Instructions of Christ.

   Let us then avoid custom as we would a dangerous headland, or the
   threatening Charybdis, or the mythic sirens. It chokes man, turns him
   away from truth, leads him away from life: custom is a snare, a gulf, a
   pit, a mischievous winnowing fan.


   "Urge the ship beyond that smoke and billow." [1024]

   Let us shun, fellow-mariners, let us shun this billow; it vomits forth
   fire: it is a wicked island, heaped with bones and corpses, and in it
   sings a fair courtesan, Pleasure, delighting with music for the common
   ear.


   "Hie thee hither, far-famed Ulysses, great glory of the Achæans;

   Moor the ship, that thou mayest hear diviner voice." [1025]

   She praises thee, O mariner, and calls the illustrious; and the
   courtesan tries to win to herself the glory of the Greeks. Leave her to
   prey on the dead; a heavenly spirit comes to thy help: pass by
   Pleasure, she beguiles.


   "Let not a woman with flowing train cheat you of your senses,

   With her flattering prattle seeking your hurt."

   Sail past the song; it works death. Exert your will only, and you have
   overcome ruin; bound to the wood of the cross, thou shalt be freed from
   destruction: the word of God will be thy pilot, and the Holy Spirit
   will bring thee to anchor in the haven of heaven. Then shalt thou see
   my God, and be initiated into the sacred mysteries, and come to the
   fruition of those things which are laid up in heaven reserved for me,
   which "ear hath not heard, nor have they entered into the heart of
   any." [1026]


   "And in sooth methinks I see two suns,

   And a double Thebes," [1027]

   said one frenzy-stricken in the worship of idols, intoxicated with mere
   ignorance. I would pity him in his frantic intoxication, and thus
   frantic I would invite him to the sobriety of salvation; for the Lord
   welcomes a sinner's repentance, and not his death.

   Come, O madman, not leaning on the thyrsus, not crowned with ivy; throw
   away the mitre, throw away the fawn-skin; come to thy senses. I will
   show thee the Word, and the mysteries of the Word, expounding them
   after thine own fashion. This is the mountain beloved of God, not the
   subject of tragedies like Cithæron, but consecrated to dramas of the
   truth,--a mount of sobriety, shaded with forests of purity; and there
   revel on it not the Mænades, the sisters of Semele, who was struck by
   the thunderbolt, practising in their initiatory rites unholy division
   of flesh, but the daughters of God, the fair lambs, who celebrate the
   holy rites of the Word, raising a sober choral dance. The righteous are
   the chorus; the music is a hymn of the King of the universe. The
   maidens strike the lyre, the angels praise, the prophets speak; the
   sound of music issues forth, they run and pursue the jubilant band;
   those that are called make haste, eagerly desiring to receive the
   Father.

   Come thou also, O aged man, leaving Thebes, and casting away from thee
   both divination and Bacchic frenzy, allow thyself to be led to the
   truth. I give thee the staff [of the cross] on which to lean. Haste,
   Tiresias; believe, and thou wilt see. Christ, by whom the eyes of the
   blind recover sight, will shed on thee a light brighter than the sun;
   night will flee from thee, fire will fear, death will be gone; thou,
   old man, who saw not Thebes, shalt see the heavens. O truly sacred
   mysteries! O stainless light! My way is lighted with torches, and I
   survey the heavens and God; I become holy whilst I am initiated. The
   Lord is the hierophant, and seals while illuminating him who is
   initiated, and presents to the Father him who believes, to be kept safe
   for ever. Such are the reveries of my mysteries. If it is thy wish, be
   thou also initiated; and thou shall join the choir along with angels
   around the unbegotten and indestructible and the only true God, the
   Word of God, raising the hymn with us. [1028] This Jesus, who is
   eternal, the one great High Priest of the one God, and of His Father,
   prays for and exhorts men.

   "Hear, ye myriad tribes, rather whoever among men are endowed with
   reason, both barbarians and Greeks. I call on the whole race of men,
   whose Creator I am, by the will of the Father. Come to Me, that you may
   be put in your due rank under the one God and the one Word of God; and
   do not only have the advantage of the irrational creatures in the
   possession of reason; for to you of all mortals I grant the enjoyment
   of immortality. For I want, I want to impart to you this grace,
   bestowing on you the perfect boon of immortality; and I confer on you
   both the Word and the knowledge of God, My complete self. This am I,
   this God wills, this is symphony, this the harmony of the Father, this
   is the Son, this is Christ, this the Word of God, the arm of the Lord,
   the power of the universe, the will of the Father; of which things
   there were images of old, but not all adequate. I desire to restore you
   according to the original model, that ye may become also like Me. I
   anoint you with the ungent of faith, by which you throw off corruption,
   and show you the naked form of righteousness by which you ascend to
   God. Come to Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will
   give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek
   and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest to your souls. For My yoke
   is easy, and My burden light." [1029]

   Let us haste, let us run, my fellow-men--us, who are God-loving and
   God-like images of the Word. Let us haste, let us run, let us take His
   yoke, let us receive, to conduct us to immortality, the good charioteer
   of men. Let us love Christ. He led the colt with its parent; and having
   yoked the team of humanity to God, directs His chariot to immortality,
   hastening clearly to fulfil, by driving now into heaven, what He
   shadowed forth before by riding into Jerusalem. A spectacle most
   beautiful to the Father is the eternal Son crowned with victory. [1030]
   Let us aspire, then, after what is good; let us become God-loving men,
   and obtain the greatest of all things which are incapable of being
   harmed--God and life. Our helper is the Word; let us put confidence in
   Him; and never let us be visited with such a craving for silver and
   gold, and glory, as for the Word of truth Himself. For it will not, it
   will not be pleasing to God Himself if we value least those things
   which are worth most, and hold in the highest estimation the manifest
   enormities and the utter impiety of folly, and ignorance, and
   thoughtlessness, and idolatry. For not improperly the sons of the
   philosophers consider that the foolish are guilty of profanity and
   impiety in whatever they do; and describing ignorance itself as a
   species of madness, allege that the multitude are nothing but madmen.
   There is therefore no room to doubt, the Word will say, whether it is
   better to be sane or insane; but holding on to truth with our teeth, we
   must with all our might follow God, and in the exercise of wisdom
   regard all things to be, as they are, His; and besides, having learned
   that we are the most excellent of His possessions, let us commit
   ourselves to God, loving the Lord God, and regarding this as our
   business all our life long. And if what belongs to friends be reckoned
   common property, and man be the friend of God--for through the
   mediation of the Word has he been made the friend of God--then
   accordingly all things become man's, because all things are God's, and
   the common property of both the friends, God and man.

   It is time, then, for us to say that the pious Christian alone is rich
   and wise, and of noble birth, and thus call and believe him to be God's
   image, and also His likeness, [1031] having become righteous and holy
   and wise by Jesus Christ, and so far already like God. Accordingly this
   grace is indicated by the prophet, when he says, "I said that ye are
   gods, and all sons of the Highest." [1032] For us, yea us, He has
   adopted, and wishes to be called the Father of us alone, not of the
   unbelieving. Such is then our position who are the attendants of
   Christ.


   "As are men's wishes, so are their words;

   As are their words, so are their deeds;

   And as their works, such is their life."

   Good is the whole life of those who have known Christ.

   Enough, methinks, of words, though, impelled by love to man, I might
   have gone on to pour out what I had from God, that I might exhort to
   what is the greatest of blessings--salvation. [1033] For discourses
   concerning the life which has no end, are not readily brought to the
   end of their disclosures. To you still remains this conclusion, to
   choose which will profit you most--judgment or grace. For I do not
   think there is even room for doubt which of these is the better; nor is
   it allowable to compare life with destruction.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1024] Odyss., xii. 219.

   [1025] Odyss., xii. 184.

   [1026] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [1027] Eurip., Bacch., 918.

   [1028] [Here are references to baptism and the Eucharist, and to the
   Trisagion, "Therefore with angels and archangels," which was
   universally diffused in the Christian Church. Bunsen, Hippol., iii.
   63.]

   [1029] Matt. xi. 28, 29, 30.

   [1030] ["Who is this that cometh from Edom," seems to be in mind. Isa.
   lxiii. 1.]

   [1031] Clement here draws a distinction, frequently made by early
   Christian writers, between the image and the likeness of God. Man never
   loses the image of God; but as the likeness consists in moral
   resemblance, he may lose it, and he recovers it only when he becomes
   righteous, holy, and wise.

   [1032] Ps. lxxxii. 6.

   [1033] [Let me quote from an excellent author: "We ought to give the
   Fathers credit for knowing what arguments were best calculated to
   affect the minds of those whom they were addressing. It was unnecessary
   for them to establish, by a long train of reasoning, the probability
   that a revelation may be made from heaven to man, or to prove the
   credibility of miracles . . . The majority, both of the learned and
   unlearned, were fixed in the belief that the Deity exercised an
   immediate control over the human race, and consequently felt no
   predisposition to reject that which purported to be a communication of
   His will. . . . Accustomed as they were, however, to regard the various
   systems proposed by philosophers as matters of curious speculation,
   designed to exercise the understanding, not to influence the conduct,
   the chief difficulty of the advocate of Christianity was to prevent
   them from treating it with the same levity, and to induce them to view
   it in its true light as a revelation declaring truths of the highest
   practical importance." This remark of Bishop Kaye is a hint of vast
   importance in our study of the early Apologists. It is taken from that
   author's Account of the Writings of Clement of Alexandria (London,
   1835), to which I would refer the student, as the best introduction to
   these works that I know of. It is full of valuable comment and
   exposition. I make only sparing reference to it, however, in these
   pages, as otherwise I should hardly know what to omit, or to include.]
     __________________________________________________________________

   clement_alex instructor anf02 clement_alex_instructor The Instructor
   /ccel/schaff/anf02.vi.iii.html
     __________________________________________________________________

The Instructor.

  [Pædagogus.]
     __________________________________________________________________

  Book I
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter I. The Office of the Instructor.

   As there are these three things in the case of man, habits, actions,
   and passions; habits are the department appropriated by hortatory
   discourse the guide to piety, which, like the ship's keel, is laid
   beneath for the building up of faith; in which, rejoicing exceedingly,
   and abjuring our old opinions, through salvation we renew our youth,
   singing with the hymning prophecy, "How good is God to Israel, to such
   as are upright in heart!" [1034] All actions, again, are the province
   of preceptive discourse; while persuasive discourse applies itself to
   heal the passions. It is, however, one and the self-same word which
   rescues man from the custom of this world in which he has been reared,
   and trains him up in the one salvation of faith in God.

   When, then, the heavenly guide, the Word, was inviting [1035] men to
   salvation, the appellation of hortatory was properly applied to Him:
   his same word was called rousing (the whole from a part). For the whole
   of piety is hortatory, engendering in the kindred faculty of reason a
   yearning after true life now and to come. But now, being at once
   curative and preceptive, following in His own steps, He makes what had
   been prescribed the subject of persuasion, promising the cure of the
   passions within us. Let us then designate this Word appropriately by
   the one name Tutor (or Pædagogue, or Instructor).

   The Instructor being practical, not theoretical, His aim is thus to
   improve the soul, not to teach, and to train it up to a virtuous, not
   to an intellectual life. Although this same word is didactic, but not
   in the present instance. For the word which, in matters of doctrine,
   explains and reveals, is that whose province it is to teach. But our
   Educator [1036] being practical, first exhorts to the attainment of
   right dispositions and character, and then persuades us to the
   energetic practice of our duties, enjoining on us pure commandments,
   and exhibiting to such as come after representations of those who
   formerly wandered in error. Both are of the highest utility,--that
   which assumes the form of counselling to obedience, and that which is
   presented in the form of example; which latter is of two kinds,
   corresponding to the former duality,--the one having for its purpose
   that we should choose and imitate the good, and the other that we
   should reject and turn away from the opposite.

   Hence accordingly ensues the healing of our passions, in consequence of
   the assuagements of those examples; the Pædagogue strengthening our
   souls, and by His benign commands, as by gentle medicines, guiding the
   sick to the perfect knowledge of the truth.

   There is a wide difference between health and knowledge; for the latter
   is produced by learning, the former by healing. One, who is ill, will
   not therefore learn any branch of instruction till he is quite well.
   For neither to learners nor to the sick is each injunction invariably
   expressed similarly; but to the former in such a way as to lead to
   knowledge, and to the latter to health. As, then, for those of us who
   are diseased in body a physician is required, so also those who are
   diseased in soul require a pædagogue to cure our maladies; and then a
   teacher, to train and guide the soul to all requisite knowledge when it
   is made able to admit the revelation of the Word. Eagerly desiring,
   then, to perfect us by a gradation conducive to salvation, suited for
   efficacious discipline, a beautiful arrangement is observed by the
   all-benignant Word, who first exhorts, then trains, and finally
   teaches.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1034] Ps. lxxiii. 1.

   [1035] [See Exhortation to the Heathen, cap. xi. p. 203, supra.]

   [1036] The pædagogus. [This word seems to be used by Clement, with
   frequent alusion, at least, to its original idea, of one who leads the
   child to his instructor; which is the true idea, I suppose, in Gal.
   iii. 24.]
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter II.--Our Instructor's Treatment of Our Sins.

   Now, O you, my children, our Instructor is like His Father God, whose
   son He is, sinless, blameless, and with a soul devoid of passion; God
   in the form of man, stainless, the minister of His Father's will, the
   Word who is God, who is in the Father, who is at the Father's right
   hand, and with the form of God is God. He is to us a spotless image; to
   Him we are to try with all our might to assimilate our souls. He is
   wholly free from human passions; wherefore also He alone is judge,
   because He alone is sinless. As far, however, as we can, let us try to
   sin as little as possible. For nothing is so urgent in the first place
   as deliverance from passions and disorders, and then the checking of
   our liability to fall into sins that have become habitual. It is best,
   therefore, not to sin at all in any way, which we assert to be the
   prerogative of God alone; next to keep clear of voluntary
   transgressions, which is characteristic of the wise man; thirdly, not
   to fall into many involuntary offences, which is peculiar to those who
   have been excellently trained. Not to continue long in sins, let that
   be ranked last. But this also is salutary to those who are called back
   to repentance, to renew the contest.

   And the Instructor, as I think, very beautifully says, through Moses:
   "If any one die suddenly by him, straightway the head of his
   consecration shall be polluted, and shall be shaved," [1037]
   designating involuntary sin as sudden death. And He says that it
   pollutes by defiling the soul: wherefore He prescribes the cure with
   all speed, advising the head to be instantly shaven; that is,
   counselling the locks of ignorance which shade the reason to be shorn
   clean off, that reason (whose seat is in the brain), being left bare of
   the dense stuff of vice, may speed its way to repentance. Then after a
   few remarks He adds, "The days before are not reckoned irrational,"
   [1038] by which manifestly sins are meant which are contrary to reason.
   The involuntary act He calls "sudden," the sin He calls "irrational."
   Wherefore the Word, the Instructor, has taken the charge of us, in
   order to the prevention of sin, which is contrary to reason.

   Hence consider the expression of Scripture, "Therefore these things
   saith the Lord;" the sin that had been committed before is held up to
   reprobation by the succeeding expression "therefore," according to
   which the righteous judgment follows. This is shown conspicuously by
   the prophets, when they said, "Hadst thou not sinned, He would not have
   uttered these threatenings." "Therefore thus saith the Lord;" "Because
   thou hast not heard these words, therefore these things the Lord;" and,
   "Therefore, behold, the Lord saith." For prophecy is given by reason
   both of obedience and disobedience: for obedience, that we may be
   saved; for disobedience, that we may be corrected.

   Our Instructor, the Word, therefore cures the unnatural passions of the
   soul by means of exhortations. For with the highest propriety the help
   of bodily diseases is called the healing art--an art acquired by human
   skill. But the paternal Word is the only Pæonian physician of human
   infirmities, and the holy charmer of the sick soul. "Save," it is said,
   "Thy servant, O my God, who trusteth in Thee. Pity me, O Lord; for I
   will cry to Thee all the day." [1039] For a while the "physician's
   art," according to Democritus, "heals the diseases of the body; wisdom
   frees the soul from passion." But the good Instructor, the Wisdom, the
   Word of the Father, who made man, cares for the whole nature of His
   creature; the all-sufficient Physician of humanity, the Saviour, heals
   both body and soul. "Rise up," He said to the paralytic; "take the bed
   on which thou liest, and go away home;" [1040] and straightway the
   infirm man received strength. And to the dead He said, "Lazarus, go
   forth;" [1041] and the dead man issued from his coffin such as he was
   ere he died, having undergone resurrection. Further, He heals the soul
   itself by precepts and gifts--by precepts indeed, in course of time,
   but being liberal in His gifts, He says to us sinners, "Thy sins be
   forgiven thee." [1042]

   We, however, as soon as He conceived the thought, became His children,
   having had assigned us the best and most secure rank by His orderly
   arrangement, which first circles about the world, the heavens, and the
   sun's circuits, and occupies itself with the motions of the rest of the
   stars for man's behoof, and then busies itself with man himself, on
   whom all its care is concentrated; and regarding him as its greatest
   work, regulated his soul by wisdom and temperance, and tempered the
   body with beauty and proportion. And whatever in human actions is right
   and regular, is the result of the inspiration of its rectitude and
   order.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1037] Num. vi. 9.

   [1038] Num. vi. 12.

   [1039] Ps. lxxxvi. 2, 3.

   [1040] Mark ii. 11.

   [1041] John xi. 43.

   [1042] Matt. ix. 2.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter III.--The Philanthropy of the Instructor.

   The Lord ministers all good and all help, both as man and as God: as
   God, forgiving our sins; and as man, training us not to sin. Man is
   therefore justly dear to God, since he is His workmanship. The other
   works of creation He made by the word of command alone, but man He
   framed by Himself, by His own hand, and breathed into him what was
   peculiar to Himself. What, then, was fashioned by Him, and after He
   likeness, either was created by God Himself as being desirable on its
   own account, or was formed as being desirable on account of something
   else. If, then, man is an object desirable for itself, then He who is
   good loved what is good, and the love-charm is within even in man, and
   is that very thing which is called the inspiration [or breath] of God;
   but if man was a desirable object on account of something else, God had
   no other reason for creating him, than that unless he came into being,
   it was not possible for God to be a good Creator, or for man to arrive
   at the knowledge of God. For God would not have accomplished that on
   account of which man was created otherwise than by the creation of man;
   and what hidden power in willing God possessed, He carried fully out by
   the forth-putting of His might externally in the act of creating,
   receiving from man what He made man; [1043] and whom He had He saw, and
   what He wished that came to pass; and there is nothing which God cannot
   do. Man, then, whom God made, is desirable for himself, and that which
   is desirable on his account is allied to him to whom it is desirable on
   his account; and this, too, is acceptable and liked.

   But what is loveable, and is not also loved by Him? And man has been
   proved to be loveable; consequently man is loved by God. For how shall
   he not be loved for whose sake the only-begotten Son is sent from the
   Father's bosom, the Word of faith, the faith which is superabundant;
   the Lord Himself distinctly confessing and saying, "For the Father
   Himself loveth you, because ye have loved Me;" [1044] and again, "And
   hast loved them as Thou hast loved Me?" [1045] What, then, the Master
   desires and declares, and how He is disposed in deed and word, how He
   commands what is to be done, and forbids the opposite, has already been
   shown.

   Plainly, then, the other kind of discourse, the didactic, is powerful
   and spiritual, observing precision, occupied in the contemplation of
   mysteries. But let it stand over for the present. Now, it is incumbent
   on us to return His love, who lovingly guides us to that life which is
   best; and to live in accordance with the injunctions of His will, not
   only fulfilling what is commanded, or guarding against what is
   forbidden, but turning away from some examples, and imitating others as
   much as we can, and thus to perform the works of the Master according
   to His similitude, and so fulfil what Scripture says as to our being
   made in His image and likeness. For, wandering in life as in deep
   darkness, we need a guide that cannot stumble or stray; and our guide
   is the best, not blind, as the Scripture says, "leading the blind into
   pits." [1046] But the Word is keen-sighted, and scans the recesses of
   the heart. As, then, that is not light which enlightens not, nor motion
   that moves not, nor loving which loves not, so neither is that good
   which profits not, nor guides to salvation. Let us then aim at the
   fulfilment of the commandments by the works of the Lord; for the Word
   Himself also, having openly become flesh, [1047] exhibited the same
   virtue, both practical and contemplative. Wherefore let us regard the
   Word as law, and His commands and counsels as the short and straight
   paths to immortality; for His precepts are full of persuasion, not of
   fear.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1043] Bishop Kaye (Some Account of the Writings and Opinions of
   Clement of Alexandria, p. 48) translates, "receiving from man that
   which made man (that on account of which man was made)." But it seems
   more likely that Clement refers to the ideal man in the divine mind,
   whom he indentifies elsewhere with the Logos, the anthropos apathes, of
   whom man was the image. The reader will notice that Clement speaks of
   man as existing in the divine mind before his creation, and creation is
   represented by God's seeing what He had previously within Him merely as
   a hidden power.

   [1044] John xvi. 27.

   [1045] John xvii. 23.

   [1046] Matt. xv. 14.

   [1047] John i. 14.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter IV.--Men and Women Alike Under the Instructor's Charge.

   Let us, then, embracing more and more this good obedience, give
   ourselves to the Lord; clinging to what is surest, the cable of faith
   in Him, and understanding that the virtue of man and woman is the same.
   For if the God of both is one, the master of both is also one; one
   church, one temperance, one modesty; their food is common, marriage an
   equal yoke; respiration, sight, hearing, knowledge, hope, obedience,
   love all alike. And those whose life is common, have common graces and
   a common salvation; common to them are love and training. "For in this
   world," he says, "they marry, and are given in marriage," [1048] in
   which alone the female is distinguished from the male; "but in that
   world it is so no more." There the rewards of this social and holy
   life, which is based on conjugal union, are laid up, not for male and
   female, but for man, the sexual desire which divides humanity being
   removed. Common therefore, too, to men and women, is the name of man.
   For this reason I think the Attics called, not boys only, but girls,
   paidarion, using it as a word of common gender; if Menander the comic
   poet, in Rhapizomena, appears to any one a sufficient authority, who
   thus speaks:--


   "My little daughter; for by nature

   The child (paidarion) is most loving.

   Arnes, too, the word for lambs, is a common name of simplicity for the
   male and female animal.

   Now the Lord Himself will feed us as His flock forever. Amen. But
   without a sheperd, neither can sheep nor any other animal live, nor
   children without a tutor, nor domestics without a master."
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1048] Luke xx. 34.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter V.--All Who Walk According to Truth are Children of God.

   That, then, Pædagogy is the training of children (paidon agoge), is
   clear from the word itself. It remains for us to consider the children
   whom Scripture points to; then to give the pædagogue charge of them. We
   are the children. In many ways Scripture celebrates us, and describes
   us in manifold figures of speech, giving variety to the simplicity of
   the faith by diverse names. Accordingly, in the Gospel, "the Lord,
   standing on the shore, says to the disciples"--they happened to be
   fishing--"and called aloud, Children, have ye any meat?" [1049]
   --addressing those that were already in the position of disciples as
   children. "And they brought to Him," it is said, "children, that He
   might put His hands on them and bless them; and when His disciples
   hindered them, Jesus said, Suffer the children, and forbid them not to
   come to Me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven." [1050] What the
   expression means the Lord Himself shall declare, saying, "Except ye be
   converted, and become as little chidren, ye shall not enter into the
   kingdom of heaven;" [1051] not in that place speaking figuratively of
   regeneration, but setting before us, for our imitation, the simplicity
   that is in children. [1052]

   The prophetic spirit also distinguishes us as children. "Plucking," it
   is said, "branches of olives or palms, the children went forth to meet
   the Lord, and cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is He
   that cometh in the name of the Lord;" [1053] light, and glory, and
   praise, with supplication to the Lord: for this is the meaning of the
   expression Hosanna when rendered in Greek. And the Scripture appears to
   me, in allusion to the prophecy just mentioned, reproachfully to
   upbraid the thoughtless: "Have ye never read, Out of the mouths of
   babes and sucklings Thou hast perfected praise?" [1054] In this way the
   Lord in the Gospels spurs on His disciples, urging them to attend to
   Him, hastening as He was to the Father; rendering His hearers more
   eager by the intimation that after a little He was to depart, and
   showing them that it was requisite that they should take more unsparing
   advantage of the truth than ever before, as the Word was to ascend to
   heaven. Again, therefore, He calls them children; for He says,
   "Children, a little while I am with you." [1055] And, again, He likens
   the kingdom of heaven to children sitting in the market-places and
   saying, "We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have
   mourned, and ye have not lamented;" [1056] and whatever else He added
   agreeably thereto. And it is not alone the Gospel that holds these
   sentiments. Prophecy also agrees with it. David accordingly says,
   "Praise, O children, the Lord; praise the name of the Lord." [1057] It
   says also by Esaias, "Here am I, and the children that God hath given
   me." [1058] Are you amazed, then, to hear that men who belong to the
   nations are sons in the Lord's sight? You do not in that case appear to
   give ear to the Attic dialect, from which you may learn that beautiful,
   comely, and freeborn young maidens are still called paidiskai, and
   servant-girls paidiskaria; and that those last also are, on account of
   the bloom of youth, called by the flattering name of young maidens.

   And when He says, "Let my lambs stand on my right," [1059] He alludes
   to the simple children, as if they were sheep and lambs in nature, not
   men; and the lambs He counts worthy of preference, from the superior
   regard He has to that tenderness and simplicity of disposition in men
   which constitutes innocence. Again, when He says, "as suckling calves,"
   He again alludes figuratively to us; and "as an innocent and gentle
   dove," [1060] the reference is again to us. Again, by Moses, He
   commands "two young pigeons or a pair of turtles to be offered for
   sin;" [1061] thus saying, that the harmlessness and innocence and
   placable nature of these tender young birds are acceptable to God, and
   explaining that like is an expiation for like. Further, the
   timorousness of the turtle-doves typifies fear in reference to sin.

   And that He calls us chickens the Scripture testifies: "As a hen
   gathereth her chickens under her wings." [1062] Thus are we the Lord's
   chickens; the Word thus marvellously and mystically describing the
   simplicity of childhood. For sometimes He calls us children, sometimes
   chickens, sometimes infants, and at other times sons, and "a new
   people," and "a recent people." "And my servants shall be called by a
   new name" [1063] (a new name, He says, fresh and eternal, pure and
   simple, and childlike and true), which shall be blessed on the earth.
   And again, He figuratively calls us colts unyoked to vice, not broken
   in by wickedness; but simple, and bounding joyously to the Father
   alone; not such horses "as neigh after their neighbours' wives, that
   are under the yoke, and are female-mad;" [1064] but free and new-born,
   jubilant by means of faith, ready to run to the truth, swift to speed
   to salvation, that tread and stamp under foot the things of the world.

   "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion; tell aloud, O daughter of
   Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh, just, meek, and bringing salvation;
   meek truly is He, and riding on a beast of burden, and a young colt."
   [1065] It was not enough to have said colt alone, but He added to it
   also young, to show the youth of humanity in Christ, and the eternity
   of simplicity, which shall know no old age. And we who are little ones
   being such colts, are reared up by our divine colt-tamer. But if the
   new man in Scripture is represented by the ass, this ass is also a
   colt. "And he bound," it is said, "the colt to the vine," having bound
   this simple and childlike people to the word, whom He figuratively
   represents as a vine. For the vine produces wine, as the Word produces
   blood, and both drink for health to men--wine for the body, blood for
   the spirit.

   And that He also calls us lambs, the Spirit by the mouth of Isaiah is
   an unimpeachable witness: "He will feed His flock like a shepherd, He
   will gather the lambs with His arm," [1066] --using the figurative
   appellation of lambs, which are still more tender than sheep, to
   express simplicity. And we also in truth, honouring the fairest and
   most perfect objects in life with an appellation derived from the word
   child, have named training paideia, and discipline paidagogia.
   Discipline (paidagogia) we declare to be right guiding from childhood
   to virtue. Accordingly, our Lord revealed more distinctly to us what is
   signified by the appellation of children. On the question arising among
   the apostles, "which of them should be the greater," Jesus placed a
   little child in the midst, saying, "Whosoever, shall humble himself as
   this little child, the same shall be the greater in the kingdom of
   heaven." [1067] He does not then use the appellation of children on
   account of their very limited amount of understanding from their age,
   as some have thought. Nor, if He says, "Except ye become as these
   children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of God," are His words to
   be understood as meaning "without learning." We, then, who are infants,
   no longer roll on the ground, nor creep on the earth like serpents as
   before, crawling with the whole body about senseless lusts; but,
   stretching upwards in soul, loosed from the world and our sins,
   touching the earth on tiptoe so as to appear to be in the world, we
   pursue holy wisdom, although this seems folly to those whose wits are
   whetted for wickedness. Rightly, then, are those called children who
   know Him who is God alone as their Father, who are simple, and infants,
   and guileless, who are lovers of the horns of the unicorns. [1068]

   To those, therefore, that have made progress in the word, He has
   proclaimed this utterance, bidding them dismiss anxious care of the
   things of this world, and exhorting them to adhere to the Father alone,
   in imitation of children. Wherefore also in what follows He says: "Take
   no anxious thought for the morrow; sufficient unto the day is the evil
   thereof." [1069] Thus He enjoins them to lay aside the cares of this
   life, and depend on the Father alone. And he who fulfils this
   commandment is in reality a child and a son to God and to the
   world,--to the one as deceived, to the other as beloved. And if we have
   one Master in heaven, as the Scripture says, then by common consent
   those on the earth will be rightly called disciples. For so is the
   truth, that perfection is with the Lord, who is always teaching, and
   infancy and childishness with us, who are always learning. Thus
   prophecy hath honoured perfection, by applying to it the appellation
   man. For instance, by David, He says of the devil: "The Lord abhors the
   man of blood;" [1070] he calls him man, as perfect in wickedness. And
   the Lord is called man, because He is perfect in righteousness.
   Directly in point is the instance of the apostle, who says, writing the
   Corinthians: "For I have espoused you to one man, that I may present
   you as a chaste virgin to Christ," [1071] whether as children or
   saints, but to the Lord alone. And writing to the Ephesians, he has
   unfolded in the clearest manner the point in question, speaking to the
   following effect: "Till we all attain to the unity of the faith, and of
   the knowledge of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature
   of the fulness of Christ: that we be no longer children, tossed to and
   fro by every wind of doctrine, by the craft of men, by their cunning in
   stratagems of deceit; but, speaking the truth in love, may grow up to
   Him in all things," [1072] --saying these things in order to the
   edification of the body of Christ, who is the head and man, the only
   one perfect in righteousness; and we who are children guarding against
   the blasts of heresies, which blow to our inflation; and not putting
   our trust in fathers who teach us otherwise, are then made perfect when
   we are the church, having received Christ the head. Then it is right to
   notice, with respect to the appellation of infant (nepios), that to
   nepion is not predicated of the silly: for the silly man is called
   neputios: and nepios is neepios (since he that is tender-hearted is
   called epios), as being one that has newly become gentle and meek in
   conduct. This the blessed Paul most clearly pointed out when he said,
   "When we might have been burdensome as the apostles of Christ, we were
   gentle (epioi) among you, as a nurse cherisheth her children." [1073]
   The child (nepios) is therefore gentle (epios), and therefore more
   tender, delicate, and simple, guileless, and destitute of hypocrisy,
   straightforward and upright in mind, which is the basis of simplicity
   and truth. For He says, "Upon whom shall I look, but upon him who is
   gentle and quiet?" [1074] For such is the virgin speech, tender, and
   free of fraud; whence also a virgin is wont to be called "a tender
   bride," and a child "tender-hearted." And we are tender who are pliant
   to the power of persuasion, and are easily drawn to goodness, and are
   mild, and free of the stain of malice and perverseness, for the ancient
   race was perverse and hard-hearted; but the band of infants, the new
   people which we are, is delicate as a child. On account of the hearts
   of the innocent, the apostle, in the Epistle to the Romans, owns that
   he rejoices, and furnishes a kind of definition of children, so to
   speak, when he says, "I would have you wise toward good, but simple
   towards evil." [1075] For the name of child, nepios, is not understood
   by us privatively, though the sons of the grammarians make the ne a
   privative particle. For if they call us who follow after childhood
   foolish, see how they utter blasphemy against the Lord, in regarding
   those as foolish who have betaken themselves to God. But if, which is
   rather the true sense, they themselves understand the designation
   children of simple ones, we glory in the name. For the new minds, which
   have newly become wise, which have sprung into being according to the
   new covenant, are infantile in the old folly. Of late, then, God was
   known by the coming of Christ: "For no man knoweth God but the Son, and
   he to whom the Son shall reveal Him." [1076]

   In contradistinction, therefore, to the older people, the new people
   are called young, having learned the new blessings; and we have the
   exuberance of life's morning prime in this youth which knows no old
   age, in which we are always growing to maturity in intelligence, are
   always young, always mild, always new: for those must necessarily be
   new, who have become partakers of the new Word. And that which
   participates in eternity is wont to be assimilated to the
   incorruptible: so that to us appertains the designation of the age of
   childhood, a lifelong spring-time, because the truth that is in us, and
   our habits saturated with the truth, cannot be touched by old age; but
   Wisdom is ever blooming, ever remains consistent and the same, and
   never changes. "Their children," it is said, "shall be borne upon their
   shoulders, and fondled on their knees; as one whom his mother
   comforteth, so also shall I comfort you." [1077] The mother draws the
   children to herself; and we seek our mother the Church. Whatever is
   feeble and tender, as needing help on account of its feebleness, is
   kindly looked on, and is sweet and pleasant, anger changing into help
   in the case of such: for thus horses' colts, and the little calves of
   cows, and the lion's whelp, and the stag's fawn, and the child of man,
   are looked upon with pleasure by their fathers and mothers. Thus also
   the Father of the universe cherishes affection towards those who have
   fled to Him; and having begotten them again by His Spirit to the
   adoption of children, knows them as gentle, and loves those alone, and
   aids and fights for them; and therefore He bestows on them the name of
   child. The word Isaac I also connect with child. Isaac means laughter.
   He was seen sporting with his wife and helpmeet Rebecca by the prying
   king. [1078] The king, whose name was Abimelech, appears to me to
   represent a supramundane wisdom contemplating the mystery of sport.
   They interpret Rebecca to mean endurance. O wise sport, laughter also
   assisted by endurance, and the king as spectator! The spirit of those
   that are children in Christ, whose lives are ordered in endurance,
   rejoice. And this is the divine sport. "Such a sport, of his own, Jove
   sports," says Heraclitus. For what other employment is seemly for a
   wise and perfect man, than to sport and be glad in the endurance of
   what is good--and, in the administration of what is good, holding
   festival with God? That which is signified by the prophet may be
   interpreted differently,--namely, of our rejoicing for salvation, as
   Isaac. He also, delivered from death, laughed, sporting and rejoicing
   with his spouse, who was the type of the Helper of our salvation, the
   Church, to whom the stable name of endurance is given; for this cause
   surely, because she alone remains to all generations, rejoicing ever,
   subsisting as she does by the endurance of us believers, who are the
   members of Christ. And the witness of those that have endured to the
   end, and the rejoicing on their account, is the mystic sport, and the
   salvation accompanied with decorous solace which brings us aid.

   The King, then, who is Christ, beholds from above our laughter, and
   looking through the window, as the Scripture says, views the
   thanksgiving, and the blessing, and the rejoicing, and the gladness,
   and furthermore the endurance which works together with them and their
   embrace: views His Church, showing only His face, which was wanting to
   the Church, which is made perfect by her royal Head. And where, then,
   was the door by which the Lord showed Himself? The flesh by which He
   was manifested. He is Isaac (for the narrative may be interpreted
   otherwise), who is a type of the Lord, a child as a son; for he was the
   son of Abraham, as Christ the Son of God, and a sacrifice as the Lord,
   but he was not immolated as the Lord. Isaac only bore the wood of the
   sacrifice, as the Lord the wood of the cross. And he laughed
   mystically, prophesying that the Lord should fill us with joy, who have
   been redeemed from corruption by the blood of the Lord. Isaac did
   everything but suffer, as was right, yielding the precedence in
   suffering to the Word. Furthermore, there is an intimation of the
   divinity of the Lord in His not being slain. For Jesus rose again after
   His burial, having suffered no harm, like Isaac released from
   sacrifice. And in defence of the point to be established, I shall
   adduce another consideration of the greatest weight. The Spirit calls
   the Lord Himself a child, thus prophesying by Esaias: "Lo, to us a
   child has been born, to us a son has been given, on whose own shoulder
   the government shall be; and His name has been called the Angel of
   great Counsel." Who, then, is this infant child? He according to whose
   image we are made little children. By the same prophet is declared His
   greatness: "Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father,
   Prince of Peace; that He might fulfil His discipline: and of His peace
   there shall be no end." [1079] O the great God! O the perfect child!
   The Son in the Father, and the Father in the Son. And how shall not the
   discipline of this child be perfect, which extends to all, leading as a
   schoolmaster us as children who are His little ones? He has stretched
   forth to us those hands of His that are conspicuously worthy of trust.
   To this child additional testimony is borne by John, "the greatest
   prophet among those born of women:" [1080] Behold the Lamb of God!"
   [1081] For since Scripture calls the infant children lambs, it has also
   called Him--God the Word--who became man for our sakes, and who wished
   in all points to be made like to us--"the Lamb of God"--Him, namely,
   that is the Son of God, the child of the Father.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1049] John xxi. 4, 5.

   [1050] Matt. xix. 14.

   [1051] Matt. xviii. 3.

   [1052] [The dignity ascribed to Christian childhood in this chapter is
   something noteworthy. The Gospel glorifying children, sanctifies
   marriage, and creates the home.]

   [1053] Matt. xxi. 9.

   [1054] Matt. xxi. 16; Ps. viii. 2.

   [1055] John xiii. 33.

   [1056] Matt. xi. 16, 17. [In the Peshitoi-Syraic version, where are
   probably found the very words our Saviour thus quotes from children in
   Nazareth, this saying is seen to be metrical and alliterative.]

   [1057] Ps. cxiii. 1.

   [1058] Isa. viii. 18.

   [1059] Matt. xxv. 33.

   [1060] Matt. x. 16.

   [1061] Lev. xv. 29, xii. 8; Luke ii. 24.

   [1062] Matt. xxiii. 37.

   [1063] Isa. lxv. 15, 16.

   [1064] Jer. v. 8.

   [1065] Zech. ix. 9; Gen. xlix. 11.

   [1066] Isa. xl. 11.

   [1067] Matt. xviii. 4.

   [1068] Theodoret explains this to mean that, as the animal referred to
   has only one horn, so those brought up in the practice of piety worship
   only one God. [It might mean lovers of those promises which are
   introduced by these words in the marvellous twenty-second Psalm.]

   [1069] Matt. vi. 34.

   [1070] Ps. v. 6.

   [1071] 2 Cor. xi. 2.

   [1072] Eph. iv. 13-15.

   [1073] 1 Thess. ii. 6, 7.

   [1074] Isa. lxvi. 2.

   [1075] Rom. xvi. 19.

   [1076] Matt. xi. 27; Luke x. 22.

   [1077] Isa. lxvi. 12, 13.

   [1078] Gen. xxvi. 8.

   [1079] Isa. ix. 6.

   [1080] Luke vii. 28.

   [1081] John i. 29, 36.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter VI.--The Name Children Does Not Imply Instruction in Elementary
      Principles.

   We have ample means of encountering those who are given to carping. For
   we are not termed children and infants with reference to the childish
   and contemptible character of our education, as those who are inflated
   on account of knowledge have calumniously alleged. Straightway, on our
   regeneration, we attained that perfection after which we aspired. For
   we were illuminated, which is to know God. He is not then imperfect who
   knows what is perfect. And do not reprehend me when I profess to know
   God; for so it was deemed right to speak to the Word, and He is free.
   [1082] For at the moment of the Lord's baptism there sounded a voice
   from heaven, as a testimony to the Beloved, "Thou art My beloved Son,
   to-day have I begotten Thee." Let us then ask the wise, Is Christ,
   begotten to-day, already perfect, or--what were most
   monstrous--imperfect? If the latter, there is some addition He requires
   yet to make. But for Him to make any addition to His knowledge is
   absurd, since He is God. For none can be superior to the Word, or the
   teacher of the only Teacher. Will they not then own, though reluctant,
   that the perfect Word born of the perfect Father was begotten in
   perfection, according to oeconomic fore-ordination? And if He was
   perfect, why was He, the perfect one, baptized? It was necessary, they
   say, to fulfil the profession that pertained to humanity. Most
   excellent. Well, I assert, simultaneously with His baptism by John, He
   becomes perfect? Manifestly. He did not then learn anything more from
   him? Certainly not. But He is perfected by the washing--of
   baptism--alone, and is sanctified by the descent of the Spirit? Such is
   the case. The same also takes place in our case, whose exemplar Christ
   became. Being baptized, we are illuminated; illuminated, we become
   sons; being made sons, we are made perfect; being made perfect, we are
   made immortal. "I," says He, "have said that ye are gods, and all sons
   of the Highest." [1083] This work is variously called grace, [1084] and
   illumination, and perfection, and washing: washing, by which we cleanse
   away our sins; grace, by which the penalties accruing to transgressions
   are remitted; and illumination, by which that holy light of salvation
   is beheld, that is, by which we see God clearly. Now we call that
   perfect which wants nothing. For what is yet wanting to him who knows
   God? For it were truly monstrous that that which is not complete should
   be called a gift (or act) of God's grace. Being perfect, He
   consequently bestows perfect gifts. As at His command all things were
   made, so on His bare wishing to bestow grace, ensues the perfecting of
   His grace. For the future of time is anticipated by the power of His
   volition.

   Further release from evils is the beginning of salvation. We then
   alone, who first have touched the confines of life, are already
   perfect; and we already live who are separated from death. Salvation,
   accordingly, is the following of Christ: "For that which is in Him is
   life. [1085] "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth My words,
   and believeth on Him that sent Me, hath eternal life, and cometh not
   into condemnation, but hath passed from death to life." [1086] Thus
   believing alone, and regeneration, is perfection in life; for God is
   never weak. For as His will is work, and this [1087] is named the
   world; so also His counsel is the salvation of men, and this has been
   called the church. He knows, therefore, whom He has called, and whom He
   has saved; and at one and the same time He called and saved them. "For
   ye are," says the apostle, "taught of God." [1088] It is not then
   allowable to think of what is taught by Him as imperfect; and what is
   learned from Him is the eternal salvation of the eternal Saviour, to
   whom be thanks for ever and ever. Amen. And he who is only
   regenerated--as the name necessarily indicates--and is enlightened, is
   delivered forthwith from darkness, and on the instant receives the
   light.

   As, then, those who have shaken off sleep forthwith become all awake
   within; or rather, as those who try to remove a film that is over the
   eyes, do not supply to them from without the light which they do not
   possess, but removing the obstacle from the eyes, leave the pupil free;
   thus also we who are baptized, having wiped off the sins which obscure
   the light of the Divine Spirit, have the eye of the spirit free,
   unimpeded, and full of light, by which alone we contemplate the Divine,
   the Holy Spirit flowing down to us from above. This is the eternal
   adjustment of the vision, which is able to see the eternal light, since
   like loves like; and that which is holy, loves that from which holiness
   proceeds, which has appropriately been termed light. "Once ye were
   darkness, now are ye light in the Lord." [1089] Hence I am of opinion
   man was called by the ancients phos. [1090] But he has not yet
   received, say they, the perfect gift. I also assent to this; but he is
   in the light, and the darkness comprehendeth him not. There is nothing
   intermediate between light and darkness. But the end is reserved till
   the resurrection of those who believe; and it is not the reception of
   some other thing, but the obtaining of the promise previously made. For
   we do not say that both take place together at the same time--both the
   arrival at the end, and the anticipation of that arrival. For eternity
   and time are not the same, neither is the attempt and the final result;
   but both have reference to the same thing, and one and the same person
   is concerned in both. Faith, so to speak, is the attempt generated in
   time; the final result is the attainment of the promise, secured for
   eternity. Now the Lord Himself has most clearly revealed the equality
   of salvation, when He said: "For this is the will of my Father, that
   every one that seeth the Son, and believeth on Him, should have
   everlasting life; and I will raise him up in the last day." [1091] As
   far as possible in this world, which is what he means by the last day,
   and which is preserved till the time that it shall end, we believe that
   we are made perfect. Wherefore He says, "He that believeth on the Son
   hath everlasting life." [1092] If, then, those who have believed have
   life, what remains beyond the possession of eternal life? Nothing is
   wanting to faith, as it is perfect and complete in itself. If aught is
   wanting to it, it is not wholly perfect. But faith is not lame in any
   respect; nor after our departure from this world does it make us who
   have believed, and received without distinction the earnest of future
   good, wait; but having in anticipation grasped by faith that which is
   future, after the resurrection we receive it as present, in order that
   that may be fulfilled which was spoken, "Be it according to thy faith."
   [1093] And where faith is, there is the promise; and the consummation
   of the promise is rest. So that in illumination what we receive is
   knowledge, and the end of knowledge is rest--the last thing conceived
   as the object of aspiration. As, then, inexperience comes to an end by
   experience, and perplexity by finding a clear outlet, so by
   illumination must darkness disappear. The darkness is ignorance,
   through which we fall into sins, purblind as to the truth. Knowledge,
   then, is the illumination we receive, which makes ignorance disappear,
   and endows us with clear vision. Further, the abandonment of what is
   bad is the adopting [1094] of what is better. For what ignorance has
   bound ill, is by knowledge loosed well; those bonds are with all speed
   slackened by human faith and divine grace, our transgressions being
   taken away by one Poeonian [1095] medicine, the baptism of the Word. We
   are washed from all our sins, and are no longer entangled in evil. This
   is the one grace of illumination, that our characters are not the same
   as before our washing. And since knowledge springs up with
   illumination, shedding its beams around the mind, the moment we hear,
   we who were untaught become disciples. Does this, I ask, take place on
   the advent of this instruction? You cannot tell the time. For
   instruction leads to faith, and faith with baptism is trained by the
   Holy Spirit. For that faith is the one universal salvation of humanity,
   and that there is the same equality before the righteous and loving
   God, and the same fellowship between Him and all, the apostle most
   clearly showed, speaking to the following effect: "Before faith came,
   we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith which should
   afterwards be revealed, so that the law became our schoolmaster to
   bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by faith; but after that
   faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster." [1096] Do you
   not hear that we are no longer under that law which was accompanied
   with fear, but under the Word, the master of free choice? Then he
   subjoined the utterance, clear of all partiality: "For ye are all the
   children of God through faith in Christ Jesus. For as many as were
   baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor
   Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor
   female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus." [1097] There are not,
   then, in the same Word some "illuminated (gnostics); and some animal
   (or natural) men;" but all who have abandoned the desires of the flesh
   are equal and spiritual before the Lord. And again he writes in another
   place: "For by one spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether
   Jews or Greeks, whether bond or free, and we have all drunk of one
   cup." [1098] Nor were it absurd to employ the expressions of those who
   call the reminiscence of better things the filtration of the spirit,
   understanding by filtration the separation of what is baser, that
   results from the reminiscence of what is better. There follows of
   necessity, in him who has come to the recollection of what is better,
   repentance for what is worse. Accordingly, they confess that the spirit
   in repentance retraces its steps. In the same way, therefore, we also,
   repenting of our sins, renouncing our iniquities, purified by baptism,
   speed back to the eternal light, children to the Father. Jesus
   therefore, rejoicing in the spirit, said: "I thank Thee, O Father, God
   of heaven and earth, that Thou hast hid these things from the wise and
   prudent, and hast revealed them to babes;" [1099] the Master and
   Teacher applying the name babes to us, who are readier to embrace
   salvation than the wise in the world, who, thinking themselves wise,
   are inflated with pride. And He exclaims in exultation and exceeding
   joy, as if lisping with the children, "Even so, Father; for so it
   seemed good in Thy sight." [1100] Wherefore those things which have
   been concealed from the wise and prudent of this present world have
   been revealed to babes. Truly, then, are we the children of God, who
   have put aside the old man, and stripped off the garment of wickedness,
   and put on the immortality of Christ; that we may become a new, holy
   people by regeneration, and may keep the man undefiled. And a babe, as
   God's little one, [1101] is cleansed from fornication and wickedness.
   With the greatest clearness the blessed Paul has solved for us this
   question in his First Epistle to the Corinthians, writing thus:
   "Brethren, be not children in understanding; howbeit in malice be
   children, but in understanding be men." [1102] And the expression,
   "When I was a child, I thought as a child, I spake as a child," [1103]
   points out his mode of life according to the law, according to which,
   thinking childish things, he persecuted, and speaking childish things
   he blasphemed the Word, not as having yet attained to the simplicity of
   childhood, but as being in its folly; for the word nepion has two
   meanings. [1104] "When I became a man," again Paul says, "I put away
   childish things." [1105] It is not incomplete size of stature, nor a
   definite measure of time, nor additional secret teachings in things
   that are manly and more perfect, that the apostle, who himself
   professes to be a preacher of childishness, alludes to when he sends
   it, as it were, into banishment; but he applies the name "children" to
   those who are under the law, who are terrified by fear as children are
   by bugbears; and "men" to us who are obedient to the Word and masters
   of ourselves, who have believed, and are saved by voluntary choice, and
   are rationally, not irrationally, frightened by terror. Of this the
   apostle himself shall testify, calling as he does the Jews heirs
   according to the first covenant, and us heirs according to promise:
   "Now I say, as long as the heir is a child, he differeth nothing from a
   servant, though he be lord of all; but is under tutors and governors,
   till the time appointed by the father. So also we, when we were
   children, were in bondage under the rudiments of the world: but when
   the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth His Son, made of a
   woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that
   we might receive the adoption of sons" [1106] by Him. See how He has
   admitted those to be children who are under fear and sins; but has
   conferred manhood on those who are under faith, by calling them sons,
   in contradistinction from the children that are under the law: "For
   thou art no more a servant," he says, "but a son; and if a son, then an
   heir through God." [1107] What, then, is lacking to the son after
   inheritance? Wherefore the expression, "When I was a child," may be
   elegantly expounded thus: that is, when I was a Jew (for he was a
   Hebrew by extraction) I thought as a child, when I followed the law;
   but after becoming a man, I no longer entertain the sentiments of a
   child, that is, of the law, but of a man, that is, of Christ, whom
   alone the Scripture calls man, as we have said before. "I put away
   childish things." But the childhood which is in Christ is maturity, as
   compared with the law. Having reached this point, we must defend our
   childhood. And we have still to explain what is said by the apostle: "I
   have fed you with milk (as children in Christ), not with meat; for ye
   were not able, neither yet are ye now able." [1108] For it does not
   appear to me that the expression is to be taken in a Jewish sense; for
   I shall oppose to it also that Scripture, "I will bring you into that
   good land which flows with milk and honey." [1109] A very great
   difficulty arises in reference to the comparison of these Scriptures,
   when we consider. For if the infancy which is characterized by the milk
   is the beginning of faith in Christ, then it is disparaged as childish
   and imperfect. How is the rest that comes after the meat, the rest of
   the man who is perfect and endowed with knowledge, again distinguished
   by infant milk? Does not this, as explaining a parable, mean something
   like this, and is not the expression to be read somewhat to the
   following effect: "I have fed you with milk in Christ;" and after a
   slight stop, let us add, "as children," that by separating the words in
   reading we may make out some such sense as this: I have instructed you
   in Christ with simple, true, and natural nourishment,--namely, that
   which is spiritual: for such is the nourishing substance of milk
   swelling out from breasts of love. So that the whole matter may be
   conceived thus: As nurses nourish new-born children on milk, so do I
   also by the Word, the milk of Christ, instilling into you spiritual
   nutriment.

   Thus, then, the milk which is perfect is perfect nourishment, and
   brings to that consummation which cannot cease. Wherefore also the same
   milk and honey were promised in the rest. Rightly, therefore, the Lord
   again promises milk to the righteous, that the Word may be clearly
   shown to be both, "the Alpha and Omega, beginning and end;" [1110] the
   Word being figuratively represented as milk. Something like this Homer
   oracularly declares against his will, when he calls righteous men
   milk-fed (galaktophagoi). [1111] So also may we take the Scripture:
   "And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as
   unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ;" [1112] so that the carnal
   may be understood as those recently instructed, and still babes in
   Christ. For he called those who had already believed on the Holy Spirit
   spiritual, and those newly instructed and not yet purified carnal; whom
   with justice he calls still carnal, as minding equally with the heathen
   the things of the flesh: "For whereas there is among you envy and
   strife, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?" [1113] "Wherefore also I
   have given you milk to drink," he says; meaning, I have instilled into
   you the knowledge which, from instruction, nourishes up to life
   eternal. But the expression, "I have given you to drink" (epotisa), is
   the symbol of perfect appropriation. For those who are full-grown are
   said to drink, babes to suck. "For my blood," says the Lord, "is true
   drink." [1114] In saying, therefore, "I have given you milk to drink,"
   has he not indicated the knowledge of the truth, the perfect gladness
   in the Word, who is the milk? And what follows next, "not meat, for ye
   were not able," may indicate the clear revelation in the future world,
   like food, face to face. "For now we see as through a glass," the same
   apostle says, "but then face to face." [1115] Wherefore also he has
   added, "neither yet are ye now able, for ye are still carnal," minding
   the things of the flesh,--desiring, loving, feeling jealousy, wrath,
   envy. "For we are no more in the flesh," [1116] as some suppose. For
   with it [they say], having the face which is like an angel's, we shall
   see the promise face to face. How then, if that is truly the promise
   after our departure hence, say they that they know "what eye hath not
   known, nor hath entered into the mind of man," who have not perceived
   by the Spirit, but received from instruction "what ear hath not heard,"
   [1117] or that ear alone which "was rapt up into the third heaven?"
   [1118] But it even then was commanded to preserve it unspoken.

   But if human wisdom, as it remains to understand, is the glorying in
   knowledge, hear the law of Scripture: "Let not the wise man glory in
   his wisdom, and let not the mighty man glory in his might; but let him
   that glorieth glory in the Lord." [1119] But we are God-taught, and
   glory in the name of Christ. How then are we not to regard the apostle
   as attaching this sense to the milk of the babes? And if we who preside
   over the Churches are shepherds after the image of the good Shepherd,
   and you the sheep, are we not to regard the Lord as preserving
   consistency in the use of figurative speech, when He speaks also of the
   milk of the flock? And to this meaning we may secondly accommodate the
   expression, "I have given you milk to drink, and not given you food,
   for ye are not yet able," regarding the meat not as something different
   from the milk, but the same in substance. For the very same Word is
   fluid and mild as milk, or solid and compact as meat. And entertaining
   this view, we may regard the proclamation of the Gospel, which is
   universally diffused, as milk; and as meat, faith, which from
   instruction is compacted into a foundation, which, being more
   substantial than hearing, is likened to meat, and assimilates to the
   soul itself nourishment of this kind. Elsewhere the Lord, in the Gospel
   according to John, brought this out by symbols, when He said: "Eat ye
   my flesh, and drink my blood;" [1120] describing distinctly by metaphor
   the drinkable properties of faith and the promise, by means of which
   the Church, like a human being consisting of many members, is refreshed
   and grows, is welded together and compacted of both,--of faith, which
   is the body, and of hope, which is the soul; as also the Lord of flesh
   and blood. For in reality the blood of faith is hope, in which faith is
   held as by a vital principle. And when hope expires, it is as if blood
   flowed forth; and the vitality of faith is destroyed. If, then, some
   would oppose, saying that by milk is meant the first lessons--as it
   were, the first food--and that by meat is meant those spiritual
   cognitions to which they attain by raising themselves to knowledge, let
   them understand that, in saying that meat is solid food, and the flesh
   and blood of Jesus, they are brought by their own vainglorious wisdom
   to the true simplicity. For the blood is found to be an original
   product in man, and some have consequently ventured to call it the
   substance of the soul. And this blood, transmuted by a natural process
   of assimilation in the pregnancy of the mother, through the sympathy of
   parental affection, effloresces and grows old, in order that there may
   be no fear for the child. Blood, too, is the moister part of flesh,
   being a kind of liquid flesh; and milk is the sweeter and finer part of
   blood. For whether it be the blood supplied to the foetus, and sent
   through the navel of the mother, or whether it be the menses themselves
   shut out from their proper passage, and by a natural diffusion, bidden
   by the all-nourishing and creating God, proceed to the already swelling
   breasts, and by the heat of the spirits transmuted, [whether it be the
   one or the other] that is formed into food desirable for the babe, that
   which is changed is the blood. For of all the members, the breasts have
   the most sympathy with the womb. When there is parturition, the vessel
   by which blood was conveyed to the foetus is cut off: there is an
   obstruction of the flow, and the blood receives an impulse towards the
   breasts; and on a considerable rush taking place, they are distended,
   and change the blood to milk in a manner analogous to the change of
   blood into pus in ulceration. Or if, on the other hand, the blood from
   the veins in the vicinity of the breasts, which have been opened in
   pregnancy, is poured into the natural hollows of the breasts; and the
   spirit discharged from the neighbouring arteries being mixed with it,
   the substance of the blood, still remaining pure, it becomes white by
   being agitated like a wave; and by an interruption such as this is
   changed by frothing it, like what takes place with the sea, which at
   the assaults of the winds, the poets say, "spits forth briny foam." Yet
   still the essence is supplied by the blood.

   In this way also the rivers, borne on with rushing motion, and fretted
   by contact with the surrounding air, murmur forth foam. The moisture in
   our mouth, too, is whitened by the breath. What an absurdity [1121] is
   it, then, not to acknowledge that the blood is converted into that very
   bright and white substance by the breath! The change it suffers is in
   quality, not in essence. You will certainly find nothing else more
   nourishing, or sweeter, or whiter than milk. In every respect,
   accordingly, it is like spiritual nourishment, which is sweet through
   grace, nourishing as life, bright as the day of Christ.

   The blood of the Word has been also exhibited as milk. Milk being thus
   provided in parturition, is supplied to the infant; and the breasts,
   which till then looked straight towards the husband, now bend down
   towards the child, being taught to furnish the substance elaborated by
   nature in a way easily received for salutary nourishment. For the
   breasts are not like fountains full of milk, flowing in ready prepared;
   but, by effecting a change in the nutriment, form the milk in
   themselves, and discharge it. And the nutriment suitable and wholesome
   for the new-formed and new-born babe is elaborated by God, the
   nourisher and the Father of all that are generated and regenerated,--as
   manna, the celestial food of angels, flowed down from heaven on the
   ancient Hebrews. Even now, in fact, nurses call the first-poured drink
   of milk by the same name as that food--manna. Further, pregnant women,
   on becoming mothers, discharge milk. But the Lord Christ, the fruit of
   the Virgin, did not pronounce the breasts of women blessed, nor
   selected them to give nourishment; but when the kind and loving Father
   had rained down the Word, Himself became spiritual nourishment to the
   good. O mystic marvel! The universal Father is one, and one the
   universal Word; and the Holy Spirit is one and the same everywhere, and
   one is the only virgin mother. I love to call her the Church. This
   mother, when alone, had not milk, because alone she was not a woman.
   But she is once virgin and mother--pure as a virgin, loving as a
   mother. And calling her children to her, she nurses them with holy
   milk, viz., with the Word for childhood. Therefore she had not milk;
   for the milk was this child fair and comely, the body of Christ, which
   nourishes by the Word the young brood, which the Lord Himself brought
   forth in throes of the flesh, which the Lord Himself swathed in His
   precious blood. O amazing birth! O holy swaddling bands! The Word is
   all to the child, both father and mother and tutor and nurse. "Eat ye
   my flesh," He says, "and drink my blood." [1122] Such is the suitable
   food which the Lord ministers, and He offers His flesh and pours forth
   His blood, and nothing is wanting for the children's growth. O amazing
   mystery! We are enjoined to cast off the old and carnal corruption, as
   also the old nutriment, receiving in exchange another new regimen, that
   of Christ, receiving Him if we can, to hide Him within; and that,
   enshrining the Saviour in our souls, we may correct the affections of
   our flesh.

   But you are not inclined to understand it thus, but perchance more
   generally. Hear it also in the following way. The flesh figuratively
   represents to us the Holy Spirit; for the flesh was created by Him. The
   blood points out to us the Word, for as rich blood the Word has been
   infused into life; and the union of both is the Lord, the food of the
   babes--the Lord who is Spirit and Word. The food--that is, the Lord
   Jesus--that is, the Word of God, the Spirit made flesh, the heavenly
   flesh sanctified. The nutriment is the milk of the Father, by which
   alone we infants are nourished. The Word Himself, then, the beloved
   One, and our nourisher, hath shed His own blood for us, to save
   humanity; and by Him, we, believing on God, flee to the Word, "the
   care-soothing breast" of the Father. And He alone, as is befitting,
   supplies us children with the milk of love, and those only are truly
   blessed who suck this breast. Wherefore also Peter says: "Laying
   therefore aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisy, and envy, and
   evil speaking, as new-born babes, desire the milk of the word, that ye
   may grow by it to salvation; if ye have tasted that the Lord is
   Christ." [1123] And were one to concede to them that the meat was
   something different from the milk, then how shall they avoid being
   transfixed on their own spit, through want of consideration of nature?
   [1124] For in winter, when the air is condensed, and prevents the
   escape of the heat enclosed within, the food, transmuted and digested
   and changed into blood, passes into the veins, and these, in the
   absence of exhalation, are greatly distended, and exhibit strong
   pulsations; consequently also nurses are then fullest of milk. And we
   have shown a little above, that on pregnancy blood passes into milk by
   a change which does not affect its substance, just as in old people
   yellow hair changes to grey. But again in summer, the body, having its
   pores more open, affords greater facility for diaphoretic action in the
   case of the food, and the milk is least abundant, since neither is the
   blood full, nor is the whole nutriment retained. If, then, the
   digestion of the food results in the production of blood, and the blood
   becomes milk, then blood is a preparation for milk, as blood is for a
   human beings, and the grape for the vine. With milk, then, the Lord's
   nutriment, we are nursed directly we are born; and as soon as we are
   regenerated, we are honoured by receiving the good news of the hope of
   rest, even the Jerusalem above, in which it is written that milk and
   honey fall in showers, receiving through what is material the pledge of
   the sacred food. "For meats are done away with," [1125] as the apostle
   himself says; but this nourishment on milk leads to the heavens,
   rearing up citizens of heaven, and members of the angelic choirs. And
   since the Word is the gushing fountain of life, and has been called a
   river of olive oil, Paul, using appropriate figurative language, and
   calling Him milk, adds: "I have given you to drink;" [1126] for we
   drink in the word, the nutriment of the truth. In truth, also liquid
   food is called drink; and the same thing may somehow be both meat and
   drink, according to the different aspects in which it is considered,
   just as cheese is the solidification of milk or milk solidified; for I
   am not concerned here to make a nice selection of an expression, only
   to say that one substance supplies both articles of food. Besides, for
   children at the breast, milk alone suffices; it serves both for meat
   and drink. "I," says the Lord, "have meat to eat that ye know not of.
   My meat is to do the will of Him that sent Me." [1127] You see another
   kind of food which, similarly with milk, represents figuratively the
   will of God. Besides, also, the completion of His own passion He called
   catachrestically "a cup," [1128] when He alone had to drink and drain
   it. Thus to Christ the fulfilling of His Father's will was food; and to
   us infants, who drink the milk of the word of the heavens, Christ
   Himself is food. Hence seeking is called sucking; for to those babes
   that seek the Word, the Father's breasts of love supply milk.

   Further, the Word declares Himself to be the bread of heaven. "For
   Moses," He says, "gave you not that bread from heaven, but My Father
   giveth you the true bread from heaven. For the bread of God is He that
   cometh down from heaven, and giveth life to the world. And the bread
   which I will give is My flesh, which I will give for the life of the
   world." [1129] Here is to be noted the mystery of the bread, inasmuch
   as He speaks of it as flesh, and as flesh, consequently, that has risen
   through fire, as the wheat springs up from decay and germination; and,
   in truth, it has risen through fire for the joy of the Church, as bread
   baked. But this will be shown by and by more clearly in the chapter on
   the resurrection. But since He said, "And the bread which I will give
   is My flesh," and since flesh is moistened with blood, and blood is
   figuratively termed wine, we are bidden to know that, as bread,
   crumbled into a mixture of wine and water, seizes on the wine and
   leaves the watery portion, so also the flesh of Christ, the bread of
   heaven absorbs the blood; that is, those among men who are heavenly,
   nourishing them up to immortality, and leaving only to destruction the
   lusts of the flesh.

   Thus in many ways the Word is figuratively described, as meat, and
   flesh, and food, and bread, and blood, and milk. The Lord is all these,
   to give enjoyment to us who have believed on Him. Let no one then think
   it strange, when we say that the Lord's blood is figuratively
   represented as milk. For is it not figuratively represented as wine?
   "Who washes," it is said, "His garment in wine, His robe in the blood
   of the grape." [1130] In His own Spirit He says He will deck the body
   of the Word; as certainly by His own Spirit He will nourish those who
   hunger for the Word.

   And that the blood is the Word, is testified by the blood of Abel,
   [1131] the righteous interceding with God. For the blood would never
   have uttered a voice, had it not been regarded as the Word: for the
   righteous man of old is the type of the new righteous one; and the
   blood of old that interceded, intercedes in the place of the new blood.
   And the blood that is the Word cries to God, since it intimated that
   the Word was to suffer.

   Further, this flesh, and the blood in it, are by a mutual sympathy
   moistened and increased by the milk. And the process of formation of
   the seed in conception ensues when it has mingled with the pure residue
   of the menses, which remains. For the force that is in the seed
   coagulating the substances of the blood, as the rennet curdles milk,
   effects the essential part of the formative process. For a suitable
   blending conduces to fruitfulness; but extremes are adverse, and tend
   to sterility. For when the earth itself is flooded by excessive rain,
   the seed is swept away, while in consequence of scarcity it is dried
   up; but when the sap is viscous, it retains the seed, and makes it
   germinate. Some also hold the hypothesis, that the seed of an animal is
   in substance the foam of the blood, which being by the natural heat of
   the male agitated and shaken out is turned into foam, and deposited in
   the seminal veins. For Diogenes Apollionates will have it, that hence
   is derived the word aphrodisia. [1132]

   From all this it is therefore evident, that the essential principle of
   the human body is blood. The contents of the stomach, too, at first are
   milky, a coagulation of fluid; then the same coagulated substance is
   changed into blood; but when it is formed into a compact consistency in
   the womb, by the natural and warm spirit by which the embryo is
   fashioned, it becomes a living creature. Further also, the child after
   birth is nourished by the same blood. For the flow of milk is the
   product of the blood; and the source of nourishment is the milk; by
   which a woman is shown to have brought forth a child, and to be truly a
   mother, by which also she receives a potent charm of affection.
   Wherefore the Holy Spirit in the apostle, using the voice of the Lord,
   says mystically, "I have given you milk to drink." [1133] For if we
   have been regenerated unto Christ, He who has regenerated us nourishes
   us with His own milk, the Word; for it is proper that what has
   procreated should forthwith supply nourishment to that which has been
   procreated. And as the regeneration was conformably spiritual, so also
   was the nutriment of man spiritual. In all respects, therefore, and in
   all things, we are brought into union with Christ, into relationship
   through His blood, by which we are redeemed; and into sympathy, in
   consequence of the nourishment which flows from the Word; and into
   immortality, through His guidance:--


   "Among men the bringing up of children

   Often produces stronger impulses to love than the procreating of them."

   The same blood and milk of the Lord is therefore the symbol of the
   Lord's passion and teaching. Wherefore each of us babes is permitted to
   make our boast in the Lord, while we proclaim:--


   "Yet of a noble sire and noble blood I boast me sprung." [1134]

   And that milk is produced from blood by a change, is already clear; yet
   we may learn it from the flocks and herds. For these animals, in the
   time of the year which we call spring, when the air has more humidity,
   and the grass and meadows are juicy and moist, are first filled with
   blood, as is shown by the distension of the veins of the swollen
   vessels; and from the blood the milk flows more copiously. But in
   summer again, the blood being burnt and dried up by the heat, prevents
   the change, and so they have less milk.

   Further, milk has a most natural affinity for water, as assuredly the
   spiritual washing has for the spiritual nutriment. Those, therefore,
   that swallow a little cold water, in addition to the above-mentioned
   milk, straightway feel benefit; for the milk is prevented from souring
   by its combination with water, not in consequence of any antipathy
   between them, but in consequence of the water taking kindly to the milk
   while it is undergoing digestion.

   And such as is the union of the Word with baptism, is the agreement of
   milk with water; for it receives it alone of all liquids, and admits of
   mixture with water, for the purpose of cleansing, as baptism for the
   remission of sins. And it is mixed naturally with honey also, and this
   for cleansing along with sweet nutriment. For the Word blended with
   love at once cures our passions and cleanses our sins; and the saying,


   "Sweeter than honey flowed the stream of speech," [1135]

   seems to me to have been spoken of the Word, who is honey. And prophecy
   oft extols Him "above honey and the honeycomb." [1136]

   Furthermore, milk is mixed with sweet wine; and the mixture is
   beneficial, as when suffering is mixed in the cup in order to
   immortality. For the milk is curdled by the wine, and separated, and
   whatever adulteration is in it is drained off. And in the same way, the
   spiritual communion of faith with suffering man, drawing off as serous
   matter the lusts of the flesh, commits man to eternity, along with
   those who are divine, immortalizing him.

   Further, many also use the fat of milk, called butter, for the lamp,
   plainly indicating by this enigma the abundant unction of the Word,
   since He alone it is who nourishes the infants, makes them grow, and
   enlightens them. Wherefore also the Scripture says respecting the Lord,
   "He fed them with the produce of the fields; they sucked honey from the
   rock, and oil from the solid rock, butter of kine, and milk of sheep,
   with fat of lambs;" [1137] and what follows He gave them. But he that
   prophesies the birth of the child says: "Butter and honey shall He
   eat." [1138] And it occurs to me to wonder how some dare call
   themselves perfect and gnostics, with ideas of themselves above the
   apostle, inflated and boastful, when Paul even owned respecting
   himself, "Not that I have already attained, or am already perfect; but
   I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which I am apprehended
   of Christ. Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but this
   one thing I do, forgetting the things which are behind, and stretching
   forth to those that are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize
   of the high calling in Christ Jesus." [1139] And yet he reckons himself
   perfect, because he has been emancipated from his former life, and
   strives after the better life, not as perfect in knowledge, but as
   aspiring after perfection. Wherefore also he adds, "As many of us as
   are perfect, are thus minded," [1140] manifestly describing perfection
   as the renunciation of sin, and regeneration into the faith of the only
   perfect One, and forgetting our former sins.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1082] In allusion apparently to John viii. 35, 36.

   [1083] Ps. lxxxii. 6.

   [1084] charisma

   [1085] John i. 4.

   [1086] John v. 24.

   [1087] viz., the result of His will.

   [1088] 1 Thess. iv. 9.

   [1089] Eph. v. 8.

   [1090] phos, light; phos, a man.

   [1091] John vi. 40.

   [1092] John iii. 36.

   [1093] Matt. ix. 29.

   [1094] Migne's text has apokalupsis. The emendation apolepsis is
   preferable.

   [1095] [Iliad, v. 401.]

   [1096] Gal. iii. 23-25. [Here the schoolmaster should be the
   child-guide; for the law leads us to the Master, says Clement, and we
   are no longer under the disciplinary guide, but "under the Word, the
   master of our free choice." The schoolmaster then is the Word, and the
   law merely led us to his school.]

   [1097] Gal. iii. 26-28.

   [1098] 1 Cor. xii. 13.

   [1099] Luke x. 21.

   [1100] Luke x. 21.

   [1101] [Clement here considers all believers as babes, in the sense he
   explains; but the tenderness towards children of the allusions running
   through this chapter are not the less striking.]

   [1102] 1 Cor. xiv. 20.

   [1103] 1 Cor. xiii. 11. [A text much misused by the heretical gnostics
   whom Clement confutes.]

   [1104] viz., simple or innocent as a child, and foolish as a child.

   [1105] 1 Cor. xiii. 11.

   [1106] Gal. iv. 1-5.

   [1107] Gal. iv. 7.

   [1108] 1 Cor. iii. 2.

   [1109] Ex. iii. 8.

   [1110] Rev. i. 8.

   [1111] [Iliad, xiii. 6. S.]

   [1112] 1 Cor. iii. 1.

   [1113] 1 Cor. iii. 3.

   [1114] John vi. 55.

   [1115] 1 Cor. xiii. 12.

   [1116] Rom. viii. 9.

   [1117] 1 Cor. ii. 9.

   [1118] 2 Cor. xii. 2-4.

   [1119] Jer. ix. 23; 1 Cor. i. 31; 2 Cor. x. 17.

   [1120] John vi. 34.

   [1121] The emendation apoleresis is adopted instead of the reading in
   the text.

   [1122] John vi. 53, 54.

   [1123] 1 Pet. ii. 1-3. Clement here reads Christos, Christ, for
   chrestos, gracious, in Text. Rec.

   [1124] [Clement here argues from what was scientific in his day,
   introducing a curious, but to us not very pertinent, episode.]

   [1125] 1 Cor. vi. 13.

   [1126] 1 Cor. iii. 2.

   [1127] John iv. 32-34.

   [1128] Matt. xx. 22, etc.

   [1129] John vi. 32, 33, 51.

   [1130] Gen. xlix. 11.

   [1131] [Matt. xxiii. 35. S.]

   [1132] [i.e., Not from the aphros, of the sea, but of the blood.]

   [1133] 1 Cor. iii. 2.

   [1134] Il., xiv. 113.

   [1135] Il., i. 248.

   [1136] Ps. xix. 10.

   [1137] Deut. xxxii. 13, 14.

   [1138] Isa. vii. 15.

   [1139] Phil. iii. 12-14.

   [1140] Phil. iii. 15.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter VII.--Who the Instructor Is, and Respecting His Instruction.

   Since, then, we have shown that all of us are by Scripture called
   children; and not only so, but that we who have followed Christ are
   figuratively called babes; and that the Father of all alone is perfect,
   for the Son is in Him, and the Father is in the Son; it is time for us
   in due course to say who our Instructor is.

   He is called Jesus. Sometimes He calls Himself a shepherd, and says, "I
   am the good Shepherd." [1141] According to a metaphor drawn from
   shepherds, who lead the sheep, is hereby understood the Instructor, who
   leads the children--the Shepherd who tends the babes. For the babes are
   simple, being figuratively described as sheep. "And they shall all," it
   is said, "be one flock, and one shepherd." [1142] The Word, then, who
   leads the children to salvation, is appropriately called the Instructor
   [1143] (Pædagogue).

   With the greatest clearness, accordingly, the Word has spoken
   respecting Himself by Hosea: "I am your Instructor." [1144] Now piety
   is instruction, being the learning of the service of God, and training
   in the knowledge of the truth, and right guidance which leads to
   heaven. And the word "instruction" [1145] is employed variously. For
   there is the instruction of him who is led and learns, and that of him
   who leads and teaches; and there is, thirdly, the guidance itself; and
   fourthly, what is taught, as the commandments enjoined.

   Now the instruction which is of God is the right direction of truth to
   the contemplation of God, and the exhibition of holy deeds in
   everlasting perseverance.

   As therefore the general directs the phalanx, consulting the safety of
   his soldiers, and the pilot steers the vessel, desiring to save the
   passengers; so also the Instructor guides the children to a saving
   course of conduct, through solicitude for us; and, in general, whatever
   we ask in accordance with reason from God to be done for us, will
   happen to those who believe in the Instructor. And just as the helmsman
   does not always yield to the winds, but sometimes, turning the prow
   towards them, opposes the whole force of the hurricanes; so the
   Instructor never yields to the blasts that blow in this world, nor
   commits the child to them like a vessel to make shipwreck on a wild and
   licentious course of life; but, wafted on by the favouring breeze of
   the Spirit of truth, stoutly holds on to the child's helm,--his ears, I
   mean,--until He bring him safe to anchor in the haven of heaven.

   What is called by men an ancestral custom passes away in a moment, but
   the divine guidance is a possession which abides for ever.

   They say that Phoenix was the instructor of Achilles, and Adrastus of
   the children of Croesus; and Leonides of Alexander, and Nausithous of
   Philip. But Phoenix was women-mad, Adrastus was a fugitive. Leonides
   did not curtail the pride of Alexander, nor Nausithous reform the
   drunken Pellæan. No more was the Thracian Zopyrus able to check the
   fornication of Alcibiades; but Zopyrus was a bought slave, and
   Sicinnus, the tutor of the children of Themistocles, was a lazy
   domestic. They say also that he invented the Sicinnian dance. Those
   have not escaped our attention who are called royal instructors among
   the Persians; whom, in number four, the kings of the Persians select
   with the greatest care from all the Persians and set over their sons.
   But the children only learn the use of the bow, and on reaching
   maturity have sexual intercourse with sisters, and mothers, and women,
   wives and courtesans innumerable, practiced in intercourse like the
   wild boars.

   But our Instructor is the holy God Jesus, the Word, who is the guide of
   all humanity. The loving God Himself is our Instructor. Somewhere in
   song the Holy Spirit says with regard to Him, "He provided sufficiently
   for the people in the wilderness. He led him about in the thirst of
   summer heat in a dry land, and instructed him, and kept him as the
   apple of His eye, as an eagle protects her nest, and shows her fond
   solicitude for her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, and
   bears them on her back. The Lord alone led them, and there was no
   strange god with them." [1146] Clearly, I trow, has the Scripture
   exhibited the Instructor in the account it gives of His guidance.

   Again, when He speaks in His own person, He confesses Himself to be the
   Instructor: "I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of
   Egypt." [1147] Who, then, has the power of leading in and out? Is it
   not the Instructor? This was He who appeared to Abraham, and said to
   him, "I am thy God, be accepted before Me;" [1148] and in a way most
   befitting an instructor, forms him into a faithful child, saying, "And
   be blameless; and I will make My covenant between Me and thee, and thy
   seed." There is the communication of the Instructor's friendship. And
   He most manifestly appears as Jacob's instructor. He says accordingly
   to him, "Lo, I am with thee, to keep thee in all the way in which thou
   shalt go; and I will bring thee back into this land: for I will not
   leave thee till I do what I have told thee." [1149] He is said, too, to
   have wrestled with Him. "And Jacob was left alone, and there wrestled
   with him a man (the Instructor) till the morning." [1150] This was the
   man who led, and brought, and wrestled with, and anointed the athlete
   Jacob against evil. [1151] Now that the Word was at once Jacob's
   trainer and the Instructor of humanity [appears from this]--"He asked,"
   it is said, "His name, and said to him, Tell me what is Thy name." And
   he said, "Why is it that thou askest My name?" For He reserved the new
   name for the new people--the babe; and was as yet unnamed, the Lord God
   not having yet become man. Yet Jacob called the name of the place,
   "Face of God." "For I have seen," he says, "God face to face; and my
   life is preserved." [1152] The face of God is the Word by whom God is
   manifested and made known. Then also was he named Israel, because he
   saw God the Lord. It was God, the Word, the Instructor, who said to him
   again afterwards, "Fear not to go down into Egypt." [1153] See how the
   Instructor follows the righteous man, and how He anoints the athlete,
   teaching him to trip up his antagonist.

   It is He also who teaches Moses to act as instructor. For the Lord
   says, "If any one sin before Me, him will I blot out of My book; but
   now, go and lead this people into the place which I told thee." [1154]
   Here He is the teacher of the art of instruction. For it was really the
   Lord that was the instructor of the ancient people by Moses; but He is
   the instructor of the new people by Himself, face to face. "For
   behold," He says to Moses, "My angel shall go before thee,"
   representing the evangelical and commanding power of the Word, but
   guarding the Lord's prerogative. "In the day on which I will visit
   them," [1155] He says, "I will bring their sins on them; that is, on
   the day on which I will sit as judge I will render the recompense of
   their sins." For the same who is Instructor is judge, and judges those
   who disobey Him; and the loving Word will not pass over their
   transgression in silence. He reproves, that they may repent. For "the
   Lord willeth the repentance of the sinner rather than his death."
   [1156] And let us as babes, hearing of the sins of others, keep from
   similar transgressions, through dread of the threatening, that we may
   not have to undergo like sufferings. What, then, was the sin which they
   committed? "For in their wrath they slew men, and in their impetuosity
   they hamstrung bulls. Cursed be their anger." [1157] Who, then, would
   train us more lovingly than He? Formerly the older people had an old
   covenant, and the law disciplined the people with fear, and the Word
   was an angel; but to the fresh and new people has also been given a new
   covenant, and the Word has appeared, and fear is turned to love, and
   that mystic angel is born--Jesus. For this same Instructor said then,
   "Thou shalt fear the Lord God;" [1158] but to us He has addressed the
   exhortation, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God." [1159] Wherefore also
   this is enjoined on us: "Cease from your own works, from your old
   sins;" "Learn to do well;" "Depart from evil, and do good;" "Thou hast
   loved righteousness, and hated iniquity." This is my new covenant
   written in the old letter. The newness of the word must not, then, be
   made ground of reproach. But the Lord hath also said in Jeremiah: "Say
   not that I am a youth: before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee,
   and before I brought thee out of the womb I sanctified thee." [1160]
   Such allusions prophecy can make to us, destined in the eye of God to
   faith before the foundation of the world; but now babes, through the
   recent fulfilment of the will of God, according to which we are born
   now to calling and salvation. Wherefore also He adds, "I have set thee
   for a prophet to the nations," [1161] saying that he must prophesy, so
   that the appellation of "youth" should not become a reproach to those
   who are called babes.

   Now the law is ancient grace given through Moses by the Word. Wherefore
   also the Scripture says, "The law was given through Moses," [1162] not
   by Moses, but by the Word, and through Moses His servant. Wherefore it
   was only temporary; but eternal grace and truth were by Jesus Christ.
   Mark the expressions of Scripture: of the law only is it said "was
   given;" but truth being the grace of the Father, is the eternal work of
   the Word; and it is not said to be given, but to be by Jesus, without
   whom nothing was. [1163] Presently, therefore, Moses prophetically,
   giving place to the perfect Instructor the Word, predicts both the name
   and the office of Instructor, and committing to the people the commands
   of obedience, sets before them the Instructor. "A prophet," says he,
   "like Me shall God raise up to you of your brethren," pointing out
   Jesus the Son of God, by an allusion to Jesus the son of Nun; for the
   name of Jesus predicted in the law was a shadow of Christ. He adds,
   therefore, consulting the advantage of the people, "Him shall ye hear;"
   [1164] and, "The man who will not hear that Prophet," [1165] him He
   threatens. Such a name, then, he predicts as that of the Instructor,
   who is the author of salvation. Wherefore prophecy invests Him with a
   rod, a rod of discipline, of rule, of authority; that those whom the
   persuasive word heals not, the threatening may heal; and whom the
   threatening heals not, the rod may heal; and whom the rod heals not,
   the fire may devour. "There shall come forth," it is said, "a rod out
   of the root of Jesse." [1166]

   See the care, and wisdom, and power of the Instructor: "He shall not
   judge according to opinion, nor according to report; but He shall
   dispense judgment to the humble, and reprove the sinners of the earth."
   And by David: "The Lord instructing, hath instructed me, and not given
   me over to death." [1167] For to be chastised of the Lord, and
   instructed, is deliverance from death. And by the same prophet He says:
   "Thou shalt rule them with a rod of iron." [1168] Thus also the
   apostle, in the Epistle to the Corinthians, being moved, says, "What
   will ye? Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, in the spirit of
   meekness?" [1169] Also, "The Lord shall send the rod of strength out of
   Sion," [1170] He says by another prophet. And this same rod of
   instruction, "Thy rod and staff have comforted me," [1171] said some
   one else. Such is the power of the Instructor--sacred, soothing,
   saving.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1141] John x. 11.

   [1142] John x. 16.

   [1143] paidagogos.

   [1144] paideutes; Hos. v. 2.

   [1145] paidagogia.

   [1146] Deut. xxxii. 10-12.

   [1147] Ex. xx. 2.

   [1148] Gen. xvii. 1, 2.

   [1149] Gen. xxviii. 15.

   [1150] Gen. xxxii. 24.

   [1151] Or, "against the evil one."

   [1152] Gen. xxxii. 30.

   [1153] Gen. xlvi. 3.

   [1154] Ex. xxxii. 33, 34.

   [1155] Ex. xxxii. 33, 34.

   [1156] Ezek. xviii. 23, 32.

   [1157] Gen. xlix. 6.

   [1158] Deut. vi. 2.

   [1159] Matt. xxii. 37.

   [1160] Jer. i. 7.

   [1161] Jer. i. 5.

   [1162] John i. 17.

   [1163] John i. 3.

   [1164] Deut. xviii. 15.

   [1165] Deut. xviii. 19.

   [1166] Isa. xi. 1, 3, 4.

   [1167] Ps. cxviii. 18.

   [1168] Ps. ii. 9.

   [1169] 1 Cor. iv. 21.

   [1170] Ps. cx. 2.

   [1171] Ps. xxiii. 4.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter VIII.--Against Those Who Think that What is Just is Not Good.

   At this stage some rise up, saying that the Lord, by reason of the rod,
   and threatening, and fear, is not good; misapprehending, as appears,
   the Scripture which says, "And he that feareth the Lord will turn to
   his heart;" [1172] and most of all, oblivious of His love, in that for
   us He became man. For more suitably to Him, the prophet prays in these
   words: "Remember us, for we are dust;" [1173] that is, Sympathize with
   us; for Thou knowest from personal experience of suffering the weakness
   of the flesh. In this respect, therefore, the Lord the Instructor is
   most good and unimpeachable, sympathizing as He does from the exceeding
   greatness of His love with the nature of each man. "For there is
   nothing which the Lord hates." [1174] For assuredly He does not hate
   anything, and yet wish that which He hates to exist. Nor does He wish
   anything not to exist, and yet become the cause of existence to that
   which He wishes not to exist. Nor does He wish anything not to exist
   which yet exists. If, then, the Word hates anything, He does not wish
   it to exist. But nothing exists, the cause of whose existence is not
   supplied by God. Nothing, then, is hated by God, nor yet by the Word.
   For both are one--that is, God. For He has said, "In the beginning the
   Word was in God, and the Word was God." [1175] If then He hates none of
   the things which He has made, it follows that He loves them. Much more
   than the rest, and with reason, will He love man, the noblest of all
   objects created by Him, and a God-loving being. Therefore God is
   loving; consequently the Word is loving.

   But he who loves anything wishes to do it good. And that which does
   good must be every way better than that which does not good. But
   nothing is better than the Good. The Good, then, does good. And God is
   admitted to be good. God therefore does good. And the Good, in virtue
   of its being good, does nothing else than do good. Consequently God
   does all good. And He does no good to man without caring for him, and
   He does not care for him without taking care of him. For that which
   does good purposely, is better than what does not good purposely. But
   nothing is better than God. And to do good purposely, is nothing else
   than to take care of man. God therefore cares for man, and takes care
   of him. And He shows this practically, in instructing him by the Word,
   who is the true coadjutor of God's love to man. But the good is not
   said to be good, on account of its being possessed of virtue; as also
   righteousness is not said to be good on account of its possessing
   virtue--for it is itself virtue--but on account of its being in itself
   and by itself good.

   In another way the useful is called good, not on account of its
   pleasing, but of its doing good. All which, therefore, is
   righteousness, being a good thing, both as virtue and as desirable for
   its own sake, and not as giving pleasure; for it does not judge in
   order to win favour, but dispenses to each according to his merits. And
   the beneficial follows the useful. Righteousness, therefore, has
   characteristics corresponding to all the aspects in which goodness is
   examined, both possessing equal properties equally. And things which
   are characterized by equal properties are equal and similar to each
   other. Righteousness is therefore a good thing.

   "How then," say they, "if the Lord loves man, and is good, is He angry
   and punishes?" We must therefore treat of this point with all possible
   brevity; for this mode of treatment is advantageous to the right
   training of the children, occupying the place of a necessary help. For
   many of the passions are cured by punishment, and by the inculcation of
   the sterner precepts, as also by instruction in certain principles. For
   reproof is, as it were, the surgery of the passions of the soul; and
   the passions are, as it were, an abscess of the truth, [1176] which
   must be cut open by an incision of the lancet of reproof.

   Reproach is like the application of medicines, dissolving the
   callosities of the passions, and purging the impurities of the lewdness
   of the life; and in addition, reducing the excrescences of pride,
   restoring the patient to the healthy and true state of humanity.

   Admonition is, as it were, the regimen of the diseased soul,
   prescribing what it must take, and forbidding what it must not. And all
   these tend to salvation and eternal health.

   Furthermore, the general of an army, by inflicting fines and corporeal
   punishments with chains and the extremest disgrace on offenders, and
   sometimes even by punishing individuals with death, aims at good, doing
   so for the admonition of the officers under him.

   Thus also He who is our great General, the Word, the Commander-in-chief
   of the universe, by admonishing those who throw off the restraints of
   His law, that He may effect their release from the slavery, error, and
   captivity of the adversary, brings them peacefully to the sacred
   concord of citizenship.

   As, therefore in addition to persuasive discourse, there is the
   hortatory and the consolatory form; so also, in addition to the
   laudatory, there is the inculpatory and reproachful. And this latter
   constitutes the art of censure. Now censure is a mark of good-will, not
   of ill-will. For both he who is a friend and he who is not, reproach;
   but the enemy does so in scorn, the friend in kindness. It is not,
   then, from hatred that the Lord chides men; for He Himself suffered for
   us, whom He might have destroyed for our faults. For the Instructor
   also, in virtue of His being good, with consummate art glides into
   censure by rebuke; rousing the sluggishness of the mind by His sharp
   words as by a scourge. Again in turn He endeavours to exhort the same
   persons. For those who are not induced by praise are spurred on by
   censure; and those whom censure calls not forth to salvation being as
   dead, are by denunciation roused to the truth. "For the stripes and
   correction of wisdom are in all time." "For teaching a fool is gluing a
   potsherd; and sharpening to sense a hopeless blockhead is bringing
   earth to sensation." [1177] Wherefore He adds plainly, "rousing the
   sleeper from deep sleep," which of all things else is likest death.

   Further, the Lord shows very clearly of Himself, when, describing
   figuratively His manifold and in many ways serviceable culture,--He
   says, "I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman." Then He
   adds, "Every branch in me that beareth not fruit He taketh away; and
   every branch that beareth fruit He pruneth, that it may bring forth
   more fruit." [1178] For the vine that is not pruned grows to wood. So
   also man. The Word--the knife--clears away the wanton shoots;
   compelling the impulses of the soul to fructify, not to indulge in
   lust. Now, reproof addressed to sinners has their salvation for its
   aim, the word being harmoniously adjusted to each one's conduct; now
   with tightened, now with relaxed cords. Accordingly it was very plainly
   said by Moses, "Be of good courage: God has drawn near to try you, that
   His fear may be among you, that ye sin not." [1179] And Plato, who had
   learned from this source, says beautifully: "For all who suffer
   punishment are in reality treated well, for they are benefited; since
   the spirit of those who are justly punished is improved." And if those
   who are corrected receive good at the hands of justice, and, according
   to Plato, what is just is acknowledged to be good, fear itself does
   good, and has been found to be for men's good. "For the soul that
   feareth the Lord shall live, for their hope is in Him who saveth them."
   [1180] And this same Word who inflicts punishment is judge; regarding
   whom Esaias also says, "The Lord has assigned Him to our sins," [1181]
   plainly as a corrector and reformer of sins. Wherefore He alone is able
   to forgive our iniquities, who has been appointed by the Father,
   Instructor of us all; He alone it is who is able to distinguish between
   disobedience and obedience. And while He threatens, He manifestly is
   unwilling to inflict evil to execute His threatenings; but by inspiring
   men with fear, He cuts off the approach to sin, and shows His love to
   man, still delaying, and declaring what they shall suffer if they
   continue sinners, and is not as a serpent, which the moment it fastens
   on its prey devours it.

   God, then, is good. And the Lord speaks many a time and oft before He
   proceeds to act. "For my arrows," He says, "will make an end of them;
   they shall be consumed with hunger, and be eaten by birds; and there
   shall be incurable tetanic incurvature. I will send the teeth of wild
   beasts upon them, with the rage of serpents creeping on the earth.
   Without, the sword shall make them childless; and out of their chambers
   shall be fear." [1182] For the Divine Being is not angry in the way
   that some think; but often restrains, and always exhorts humanity, and
   shows what ought to be done. And this is a good device, to terrify lest
   we sin. "For the fear of the Lord drives away sins, and he that is
   without fear cannot be justified," [1183] says the Scripture. And God
   does not inflict punishment from wrath, but for the ends of justice;
   since it is not expedient that justice should be neglected on our
   account. Each one of us, who sins, with his own free-will chooses
   punishment, and the blame lies with him who chooses. [1184] God is
   without blame. "But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of
   God, what shall we say? Is God unrighteous, who taketh vengeance? God
   forbid." [1185] He says, therefore, threatening, "I will sharpen my
   sword, and my hand shall lay hold on judgment; and I will render
   justice to mine enemies, and requite those who hate me. I will make
   mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh from the
   blood of the wounded." [1186] It is clear, then, that those who are not
   at enmity with the truth, and do not hate the Word, will not hate their
   own salvation, but will escape the punishment of enmity. "The crown of
   wisdom," then, as the book of Wisdom says, "is the fear of the Lord."
   [1187] Very clearly, therefore, by the prophet Amos has the Lord
   unfolded His method of dealing, saying, "I have overthrown you, as God
   overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah; and ye shall be as a brand plucked from
   the fire: and yet ye have not returned unto me, saith the Lord." [1188]

   See how God, through His love of goodness, seeks repentance; and by
   means of the plan He pursues of threatening silently, shows His own
   love for man. "I will avert," He says, "My face from them, and show
   what shall happen to them." [1189] For where the face of the Lord
   looks, there is peace and rejoicing; but where it is averted, there is
   the introduction of evil. The Lord, accordingly, does not wish to look
   on evil things; for He is good. But on His looking away, evil arises
   spontaneously through human unbelief. "Behold, therefore," says Paul,
   "the goodness and severity of God: on them that fell, severity; but
   upon thee, goodness, if thou continue in His goodness," [1190] that is,
   in faith in Christ.

   Now hatred of evil attends the good man, in virtue of His being in
   nature good. Wherefore I will grant that He punishes the disobedient
   (for punishment is for the good and advantage of him who is punished,
   for it is the correction of a refractory subject); but I will not grant
   that He wishes to take vengeance. Revenge is retribution for evil,
   imposed for the advantage of him who takes the revenge. He will not
   desire us to take revenge, who teaches us "to pray for those that
   despitefully use us." [1191] But that God is good, all willingly admit;
   and that the same God is just, I require not many more words to prove,
   after adducing the evangelical utterance of the Lord; He speaks of Him
   as one, "That they all may be one; as Thou, Father, art in Me, and I in
   Thee, that they also may be one in Us: that the world also may believe
   that Thou hast sent Me. And the glory which Thou hast given Me I have
   given them; that they may be one, as We are one: I in them, and Thou in
   Me, that they may be made perfect in one." [1192] God is one, and
   beyond the one and above the Monad itself. Wherefore also the particle
   "Thou," having a demonstrative emphasis, points out God, who alone
   truly is, "who was, and is, and is to come," in which three divisions
   of time the one name (o on); "who is," [1193] has its place. And that
   He who alone is God is also alone and truly righteous, our Lord in the
   Gospel itself shall testify, saying "Father, I will that they also whom
   Thou hast given Me be with Me where I am; that they may behold My
   glory, which Thou hast given Me: For Thou lovedst Me before the
   foundation of the world. O righteous Father, the world hath not known
   Thee: but I have known Thee, and these have known that Thou hast sent
   Me. And I have declared to them Thy name, and will declare it." [1194]
   This is He "that visits the iniquities of the fathers upon the
   children, to them that hate Him, and shows mercy to those that love
   Him." [1195] For He who placed some "on the right hand, and others on
   the left," [1196] conceived as Father, being good, is called that which
   alone He is--"good;" [1197] but as He is the Son in the Father, being
   his Word, from their mutual relation, the name of power being measured
   by equality of love, He is called righteous. "He will judge," He says,
   "a man according to his works," [1198] --a good balance, even God
   having made known to us the face of righteousness in the person of
   Jesus, by whom also, as by even scales, we know God. Of this also the
   book of Wisdom plainly says, "For mercy and wrath are with Him, for He
   alone is Lord of both," Lord of propitiations, and pouring forth wrath
   according to the abundance of His mercy. "So also is His reproof."
   [1199] For the aim of mercy and of reproof is the salvation of those
   who are reproved.

   Now, that the God and Father of our Lord Jesus is good, the Word
   Himself will again avouch: "For He is kind to the unthankful and the
   evil;" and further, when He says, "Be merciful, as your Father is
   merciful." [1200] Still further also He plainly says, "None is good,
   but My Father, who is in heaven." [1201] In addition to these, again He
   says, "My Father makes His sun to shine on all." [1202] Here it is to
   be noted that He proclaims His Father to be good, and to be the
   Creator. And that the Creator is just, is not disputed. And again he
   says, "My Father sends rain on the just, and on the unjust." In respect
   of His sending rain, He is the Creator of the waters, and of the
   clouds. And in respect of His doing so on all, He holds an even balance
   justly and rightly. And as being good, He does so on just and unjust
   alike.

   Very clearly, then, we conclude Him to be one and the same God, thus.
   For the Holy Spirit has sung, "I will look to the heavens, the works of
   Thy hands;" [1203] and, "He who created the heavens dwells in the
   heavens;" and, "Heaven is Thy throne." [1204] And the Lord says in His
   prayer, "Our Father, who art in heaven." [1205] And the heavens belong
   to Him, who created the world. It is indisputable, then, that the Lord
   is the Son of the Creator. And if, the Creator above all is confessed
   to be just, and the Lord to be the Son of the Creator; then the Lord is
   the Son of Him who is just. Wherefore also Paul says, "But now the
   righteousness of God without the law is manifested;" [1206] and again,
   that you may better conceive of God, "even the righteousness of God by
   the faith of Jesus Christ upon all that believe; for there is no
   difference." [1207] And, witnessing further to the truth, he adds after
   a little, "through the forbearance of God, in order to show that He is
   just, and that Jesus is the justifier of him who is of faith." And that
   he knows that what is just is good, appears by his saying, "So that the
   law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good," [1208]
   using both names to denote the same power. But "no one is good," except
   His Father. It is this same Father of His, then, who being one is
   manifested by many powers. And this was the import of the utterance,
   "No man knew the Father," [1209] who was Himself everything before the
   coming of the Son. So that it is veritably clear that the God of all is
   only one good, just Creator, and the Son in the Father, to whom be
   glory for ever and ever, Amen. But it is not inconsistent with the
   saving Word, to administer rebuke dictated by solicitude. For this is
   the medicine of the divine love to man, by which the blush of modesty
   breaks forth, and shame at sin supervenes. For if one must censure, it
   is necessary also to rebuke; when it is the time to wound the apathetic
   soul not mortally, but salutarily, securing exemption from everlasting
   death by a little pain.

   Great is the wisdom displayed in His instruction, and manifold the
   modes of His dealing in order to salvation. For the Instructor
   testifies to the good, and summons forth to better things those that
   are called; dissuades those that are hastening to do wrong from the
   attempt, and exhorts them to turn to a better life. For the one is not
   without testimony, when the other has been testified to; and the grace
   which proceeds from the testimony is very great. Besides, the feeling
   of anger (if it is proper to call His admonition anger) is full of love
   to man, God condescending to emotion on man's account; for whose sake
   also the Word of God became man.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1172] Ecclus. xxi. 6.

   [1173] Ps. ciii. 14.

   [1174] Wisd. xi. 24.

   [1175] John i. 1.

   [1176] For aletheias, there are the readings apatheias and atimias.

   [1177] Ecclus. xxii. 6-8.

   [1178] John xv. 1, 2.

   [1179] Ex. xx. 20.

   [1180] Ecclus. xxxiv. 14, 15.

   [1181] Isa. liii. 6.

   [1182] Deut. xxxii. 23-25.

   [1183] Ecclus. i. 21, 22.

   [1184] Plato, Rep., x. 617 E.

   [1185] Rom. iii. 5, 6.

   [1186] Deut. xxxii. 41, 42.

   [1187] Ecclus. i. 18.

   [1188] Amos iv. 11.

   [1189] Deut. xxxii. 20.

   [1190] Rom. xi. 22.

   [1191] Matt. v. 44.

   [1192] John. xvii. 21-23.

   [1193] Ex. iii. 14.

   [1194] John xvii. 24-26.

   [1195] Ex. xx. 5, 6.

   [1196] Matt. xx. 21, xxv. 33.

   [1197] Matt. xix. 17.

   [1198] Ecclus. xvi. 12.

   [1199] Ecclus. xvi. 12.

   [1200] Luke vi. 35, 36.

   [1201] Matt. xix. 17.

   [1202] Matt. v. 45.

   [1203] Ps. viii. 4.

   [1204] Ps. ii. 4, xi. 5, ciii. 19.

   [1205] Matt. vi. 9

   [1206] Rom. iii. 21, 22.

   [1207] Rom, iii. 26.

   [1208] Rom. vii. 12.

   [1209] Luke x. 22; John xvii. 25.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter IX.--That It is the Prerogative of the Same Power to Be Beneficent
      and to Punish Justly. Also the Manner of the Instruction of the Logos.

   With all His power, therefore, the Instructor of humanity, the Divine
   Word, using all the resources of wisdom, devotes Himself to the saving
   of the children, admonishing, upbraiding, blaming, chiding, reproving,
   threatening, healing, promising, favouring; and as it were, by many
   reins, curbing the irrational impulses of humanity. To speak briefly,
   therefore, the Lord acts towards us as we do towards our children.
   "Hast thou children? correct them," is the exhortation of the book of
   Wisdom, "and bend them from their youth. Hast thou daughters? attend to
   their body, and let not thy face brighten towards them," [1210]
   --although we love our children exceedingly, both sons and daughters,
   above aught else whatever. For those who speak with a man merely to
   please him, have little love for him, seeing they do not pain him;
   while those that speak for his good, though they inflict pain for the
   time, do him good for ever after. It is not immediate pleasure, but
   future enjoyment, that the Lord has in view.

   Let us now proceed to consider the mode of His loving discipline, with
   the aid of the prophetic testimony.

   Admonition, then, is the censure of loving care, and produces
   understanding. Such is the Instructor in His admonitions, as when He
   says in the Gospel, "How often would I have gathered thy children, as a
   bird gathers her young ones under her wings, and ye would not!" [1211]
   And again, the Scripture admonishes, saying, "And they committed
   adultery with stock and stone, and burnt incense to Baal." [1212] For
   it is a very great proof of His love, that, though knowing well the
   shamelessness of the people that had kicked and bounded away, He
   notwithstanding exhorts them to repentance, and says by Ezekiel, "Son
   of man, thou dwellest in the midst of scorpions; nevertheless, speak to
   them, if peradventure they will hear." [1213] Further, to Moses He
   says, "Go and tell Pharaoh to send My people forth; but I know that he
   will not send them forth." [1214] For He shows both things: both His
   divinity in His foreknowledge of what would take place, and His love in
   affording an opportunity for repentance to the self-determination of
   the soul. He admonishes also by Esaias, in His care for the people,
   when He says, "This people honour Me with their lips, but their heart
   is far from Me." What follows is reproving censure: "In vain do they
   worship Me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men." [1215]
   Here His loving care, having shown their sin, shows salvation side by
   side.

   Upbraiding is censure on account of what is base, conciliating to what
   is noble. This is shown by Jeremiah: "They were female-mad horses; each
   one neighed after his neighbour's wife. Shall I not visit for these
   things? saith the Lord: shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation
   as this?" [1216] He everywhere interweaves fear, because "the fear of
   the Lord is the beginning of sense." [1217] And again, by Hosea, He
   says, "Shall I not visit them? for they themselves were mingled with
   harlots, and sacrificed with the initiated; and the people that
   understood embraced a harlot." [1218] He shows their offence to be
   clearer, by declaring that they understood, and thus sinned wilfully.
   Understanding is the eye of the soul; wherefore also Israel means, "he
   that sees God"--that is, he that understands God.

   Complaint is censure of those who are regarded as despising or
   neglecting. He employs this form when He says by Esaias: "Hear, O
   heaven; and give ear, O earth: for the Lord hath spoken, I have
   begotten and brought up children, but they have disregarded Me. The ox
   knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but Israel hath not
   known Me." [1219] For how shall we not regard it fearful, if he that
   knows God, shall not recognise the Lord; but while the ox and the ass,
   stupid and foolish animals, will know him who feeds them, Israel is
   found to be more irrational than these? And having, by Jeremiah,
   complained against the people on many grounds, He adds: "And they have
   forsaken Me, saith the Lord." [1220]

   Invective [1221] is a reproachful upbraiding, or chiding censure. This
   mode of treatment the Instructor employs in Isaiah, when He says, "Woe
   to you, children revolters. Thus saith the Lord, Ye have taken counsel,
   but not by Me; and made compacts, but not by My Spirit." [1222] He uses
   the very bitter mordant of fear in each case repressing [1223] the
   people, and at the same time turning them to salvation; as also wool
   that is undergoing the process of dyeing is wont to be previously
   treated with mordants, in order to prepare it for taking on a fast
   colour.

   Reproof is the bringing forward of sin, laying it before one. This form
   of instruction He employs as in the highest degree necessary, by reason
   of the feebleness of the faith of many. For He says by Esaias, "Ye have
   forsaken the Lord, and have provoked the Holy One of Israel to anger."
   [1224] And He says also by Jeremiah: "Heaven was astonished at this,
   and the earth shuddered exceedingly. For My people have committed two
   evils; they have forsaken Me, the fountain of living waters, and have
   hewn out to themselves broken cisterns, which will not be able to hold
   water." [1225] And again, by the same: "Jerusalem hath sinned a sin;
   therefore it became commotion. All that glorified her dishonoured her,
   when they saw her baseness." [1226] And He uses the bitter and biting
   [1227] language of reproof in His consolations by Solomon, tacitly
   alluding to the love for children that characterizes His instruction:
   "My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord; nor faint when
   thou art rebuked of Him: for whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and
   scourgeth every son whom He receiveth;" [1228] "For a man who is a
   sinner escapes reproof." [1229] Consequently, therefore, the Scripture
   says, "Let the righteous reprove and correct me; but let not the oil of
   the sinner anoint my head." [1230]

   Bringing one to his senses (phrenosis) is censure, which makes a man
   think. Neither from this form of instruction does he abstain, but says
   by Jeremiah, "How long shall I cry, and you not hear? So your ears are
   uncircumcised." [1231] O blessed forbearance! And again, by the same:
   "All the heathen are uncircumcised, but this people is uncircumcised in
   heart:" [1232] "for the people are disobedient; children," says He, "in
   whom is not faith." [1233]

   Visitation is severe rebuke. He uses this species in the Gospel: "O
   Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the prophets, and stonest them that
   are sent unto thee!" The reduplication of the name gives strength to
   the rebuke. For he that knows God, how does he persecute God's
   servants? Wherefore He says, "Your house is left desolate; for I say
   unto you, Henceforth ye shall not see Me, till ye shall say, Blessed is
   He that cometh in the name of the Lord." [1234] For if you do not
   receive His love, ye shall know His power.

   Denunciation is vehement speech. And He employs denunciation as
   medicine, by Isaiah, saying, "Ah, sinful nation, lawless sons, people
   full of sins, wicked seed!" [1235] And in the Gospel by John He says,
   "Serpents, brood of vipers." [1236]

   Accusation is censure of wrong-doers. This mode of instruction He
   employs by David, when He says: "The people whom I knew not served me,
   and at the hearing of the ear obeyed me. Sons of strangers lied to me,
   and halted from their ways." [1237] And by Jeremiah: "And I gave her a
   writing of divorcement, and covenant-breaking Judah feared not." [1238]
   And again: "And the house of Israel disregarded Me; and the house of
   Judah lied to the Lord." [1239]

   Bewailing one's fate is latent censure, and by artful aid ministers
   salvation as under a veil. He made use of this by Jeremiah: "How did
   the city sit solitary that was full of people! She that ruled over
   territories became as a widow; she came under tribute; weeping, she
   wept in the night." [1240]

   Objurgation is objurgatory censure. Of this help the Divine Instructor
   made use by Jeremiah, saying, "Thou hadst a whore's forehead; thou wast
   shameless towards all; and didst not call me to the house, who am thy
   father, and lord of thy virginity." [1241] "And a fair and graceful
   harlot skilled in enchanted potions." [1242] With consummate art, after
   applying to the virgin the opprobrious name of whoredom, He thereupon
   calls her back to an honourable life by filling her with shame.

   Indignation is a rightful upbraiding; or upbraiding on account of ways
   exalted above what is right. In this way He instructed by Moses, when
   He said, "Faulty children, a generation crooked and perverse, do ye
   thus requite the Lord? This people is foolish, and not wise. Is not
   this thy father who acquired thee?" [1243] He says also by Isaiah, "Thy
   princes are disobedient, companions of thieves, loving gifts, following
   after rewards, not judging the orphans." [1244]

   In fine, the system He pursues to inspire fear is the source of
   salvation. And it is the prerogative of goodness to save: "The mercy of
   the Lord is on all flesh, while He reproves, corrects, and teaches as a
   shepherd His flock. He pities those who receive His instruction, and
   those who eagerly seek union with Him." [1245] And with such guidance
   He guarded the six hundred thousand footmen that were brought together
   in the hardness of heart in which they were found; scourging, pitying,
   striking, healing, in compassion and discipline: "For according to the
   greatness of His mercy, so is His rebuke." [1246] For it is indeed
   noble not to sin; but it is good also for the sinner to repent; just as
   it is best to be always in good health, but well to recover from
   disease. So He commands by Solomon: "Strike thou thy son with the rod,
   that thou mayest deliver his soul from death." [1247] And again:
   "Abstain not from chastising thy son, but correct him with the rod; for
   he will not die." [1248]

   For reproof and rebuke, as also the original term implies, are the
   stripes of the soul, chastizing sins, preventing death, and leading to
   self-control those carried away to licentiousness. Thus also Plato,
   knowing reproof to be the greatest power for reformation, and the most
   sovereign purification, in accordance with what has been said,
   observes, "that he who is in the highest degree impure is uninstructed
   and base, by reason of his being unreproved in those respects in which
   he who is destined to be truly happy ought to be purest and best."

   For if rulers are not a terror to a good work, how shall God, who is by
   nature good, be a terror to him who sins not? "If thou doest evil, be
   afraid," [1249] says the apostle. Wherefore the apostle himself also in
   every case uses stringent language to the Churches, after the Lord's
   example; and conscious of his own boldness, and of the weakness of his
   hearers, he says to the Galatians: "Am I your enemy, because I tell you
   the truth?" [1250] Thus also people in health do not require a
   physician, do not require him as long as they are strong; but those who
   are ill need his skill. Thus also we who in our lives are ill of
   shameful lusts and reprehensible excesses, and other inflammatory
   effects of the passions, need the Saviour. And He administers not only
   mild, but also stringent medicines. The bitter roots of fear then
   arrest the eating sores of our sins. Wherefore also fear is salutary,
   if bitter. Sick, we truly stand in need of the Saviour; having
   wandered, of one to guide us; blind, of one to lead us to the light;
   thirsty, "of the fountain of life, of which whosoever partakes, shall
   no longer thirst;" [1251] dead, we need life; sheep, we need a
   shepherd; we who are children need a tutor, while universal humanity
   stands in need of Jesus; so that we may not continue intractable and
   sinners to the end, and thus fall into condemnation, but may be
   separated from the chaff, and stored up in the paternal garner. "For
   the fan is in the Lord's hand, by which the chaff due to the fire is
   separated from the wheat." [1252] You may learn, if you will, the
   crowning wisdom of the all-holy Shepherd and Instructor, of the
   omnipotent and paternal Word, when He figuratively represents Himself
   as the Shepherd of the sheep. And He is the Tutor of the children. He
   says therefore by Ezekiel, directing His discourse to the elders, and
   setting before them a salutary description of His wise solicitude: "And
   that which is lame I will bind up, and that which is sick I will heal,
   and that which has wandered I will turn back; and I will feed them on
   my holy mountain." [1253] Such are the promises of the good Shepherd.

   Feed us, the children, as sheep. Yea, Master, fill us with
   righteousness, Thine own pasture; yea, O Instructor, feed us on Thy
   holy mountain the Church, which towers aloft, which is above the
   clouds, which touches heaven. "And I will be," He says, "their
   Shepherd," [1254] and will be near them, as the garment to their skin.
   He wishes to save my flesh by enveloping it in the robe of immortality,
   and He hath anointed my body. "They shall call Me," He says, "and I
   will say, Here am I." [1255] Thou didst hear sooner than I expected,
   Master. "And if they pass over, they shall not slip," [1256] saith the
   Lord. For we who are passing over to immortality shall not fall into
   corruption, for He shall sustain us. For so He has said, and so He has
   willed. Such is our Instructor, righteously good. "I came not," He
   says, "to be ministered unto, but to minister." [1257] Wherefore He is
   introduced in the Gospel "wearied," [1258] because toiling for us, and
   promising "to give His life a ransom for many." [1259] For him alone
   who does so He owns to be the good shepherd. Generous, therefore, is He
   who gives for us the greatest of all gifts, His own life; and
   beneficent exceedingly, and loving to men, in that, when He might have
   been Lord, He wished to be a brother man; and so good was He that He
   died for us.

   Further, His righteousness cried, "If ye come straight to me, I also
   will come straight to you but if ye walk crooked, I also will walk
   crooked, saith the Lord of hosts;" [1260] meaning by the crooked ways
   the chastisements of sinners. For the straight and natural way which is
   indicated by the Iota of the name of Jesus is His goodness, which is
   firm and sure towards those who have believed at hearing: "When I
   called, ye obeyed not, saith the Lord; but set at nought my counsels,
   and heeded not my reproofs." [1261] Thus the Lord's reproof is most
   beneficial. David also says of them, "A perverse and provoking race; a
   race which set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not
   faithful with God: they kept not the covenant of God, and would not
   walk in His law." [1262]

   Such are the causes of provocation for which the Judge comes to inflict
   punishment on those that would not choose a life of goodness. Wherefore
   also afterwards He assailed them more roughly; in order, if possible,
   to drag them back from their impetuous rush towards death. He therefore
   tells by David the most manifest cause of the threatening: "They
   believed not in His wonderful works. When He slew them, they sought
   after Him, and turned and inquired early after God; and remembered that
   God was their Helper, and God the Most High their Redeemer." [1263]
   Thus He knew that they turned for fear, while they despised His love:
   for, for the most part, that goodness which is always mild is despised;
   but He who admonishes by the loving fear of righteousness is
   reverenced.

   There is a twofold species of fear, the one of which is accompanied
   with reverence, such as citizens show towards good rulers, and we
   towards God, as also right-minded children towards their fathers. "For
   an unbroken horse turns out unmanageable, and a son who is let take his
   own way turns out reckless." [1264] The other species of fear is
   accompanied with hatred, which slaves feel towards hard masters, and
   the Hebrews felt, who made God a master, not a father. And as far as
   piety is concerned, that which is voluntary and spontaneous differs
   much, nay entirely, from what is forced. "For He," it is said, "is
   merciful; He will heal their sins, and not destroy them, and fully turn
   away His anger, and not kindle all His wrath." [1265] See how the
   justice of the Instructor, which deals in rebukes, is shown; and the
   goodness of God, which deals in compassions. Wherefore David--that is,
   the Spirit by him--embracing them both, sings of God Himself, "Justice
   and judgment are the preparation of His throne: mercy and truth shall
   go before Thy face." [1266] He declares that it belongs to the same
   power both to judge and to do good. For there is power over both
   together, and judgment separates that which is just from its opposite.
   And He who is truly God is just and good; who is Himself all, and all
   is He; for He is God, the only God.

   For as the mirror is not evil to an ugly man because it shows him what
   like he is; and as the physician is not evil to the sick man because he
   tells him of his fever,--for the physician is not the cause of the
   fever, but only points out the fever;--so neither is He, that reproves,
   ill-disposed towards him who is diseased in soul. For He does not put
   the transgressions on him, but only shows the sins which are there; in
   order to turn him away from similar practices. So God is good on His
   own account, and just also on ours, and He is just because He is good.
   And His justice is shown to us by His own Word from there from above,
   whence the Father was. For before He became Creator He was God; He was
   good. And therefore He wished to be Creator and Father. And the nature
   of all that love was the source of righteousness--the cause, too, of
   His lighting up His sun, and sending down His own Son. And He first
   announced the good righteousness that is from heaven, when He said, "No
   man knoweth the Son, but the Father; nor the Father, but the Son."
   [1267] This mutual and reciprocal knowledge is the symbol of primeval
   justice. Then justice came down to men both in the letter and in the
   body, in the Word and in the law, constraining humanity to saving
   repentance; for it was good. But do you not obey God? Then blame
   yourself, who drag to yourself the judge.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1210] Ecclus. vii. 23, 24.

   [1211] Matt. xxiii. 37.

   [1212] Jer. iii. 9, vii. 9, xi. 13, xxxii. 29.

   [1213] Ezek. ii. 6, 7.

   [1214] Ex. iii. 18, 19.

   [1215] Isa. xxix. 13.

   [1216] Jer. v. 8, 9.

   [1217] Prov. i. 7.

   [1218] Hos. iv. 14: "understood not" in the A.V.

   [1219] Isa. i. 2, 3.

   [1220] Jer i. 16, ii. 13, 29.

   [1221] Or, rebuke.

   [1222] Isa. xxx. 1.

   [1223] Lowth conjectures epistomon or epistomizon, instead of
   anastomon.

   [1224] Isa. i. 4.

   [1225] Jer. ii. 12, 13.

   [1226] Lam. i. 8.

   [1227] H. reads dektikon, for which the text has epideiktikon.

   [1228] Prov. iii. 11, 12.

   [1229] Ecclus. xxxii. 21.

   [1230] Ps. cxli. 5.

   [1231] Jer. vi. 10.

   [1232] Jer. ix. 26.

   [1233] Isa. xxx. 9.

   [1234] Matt. xxiii. 37-39.

   [1235] Isa. i. 4.

   [1236] Nothing similar to this is found in the fourth Gospel; the
   reference may be to the words of the Baptist, Matt. iii. 7, Luke iii.
   7.

   [1237] Ps. xviii. 43-45.

   [1238] Jer. iii. 8.

   [1239] Jer. v. 11, 12.

   [1240] Lam. i. 1, 2.

   [1241] Jer. iii. 3, 4.

   [1242] Nahum iii. 4.

   [1243] Deut. xxxii. 5, 6.

   [1244] Isa. i. 23.

   [1245] Ecclus. xviii. 13, 14.

   [1246] Ecclus. xvi. 12.

   [1247] Prov. xxiii. 14.

   [1248] Prov. xxiii. 13.

   [1249] Rom. xiii. 3, 4.

   [1250] Gal. iv. 16.

   [1251] John iv. 13, 14.

   [1252] Matt. iii. 12; Luke iii. 17.

   [1253] Ezek. xxxiv. 14, 15, 16.

   [1254] Ezek. xxxiv. 14-16.

   [1255] Isa. lviii. 9.

   [1256] Isa. xliii. 2.

   [1257] Matt. xx. 28; Mark x. 45.

   [1258] John iv. 6.

   [1259] Matt. xx. 28.

   [1260] Here Clement gives the sense of various passages, e.g., Jer.
   vi., Lev. xxvi.

   [1261] Prov. i. 24, 25.

   [1262] Ps. lxxviii. 8, 10.

   [1263] Ps. lxxviii. 32-35.

   [1264] Ecclus. xxx. 8.

   [1265] Ps. lxxviii. 38.

   [1266] Ps. lxxxix. 14.

   [1267] Luke x. 22.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter X.--That the Same God, by the Same Word, Restrains from Sin by
      Threatening, and Saves Humanity by Exhorting.

   If, then, we have shown that the plan of dealing stringently with
   humanity is good and salutary, and necessarily adopted by the Word, and
   conducive to repentance and the prevention of sins; we shall have now
   to look in order at the mildness of the Word. For He has been
   demonstrated to be just. He sets before us His own inclinations which
   invite to salvation; by which, in accordance with the Father's will, He
   wishes to make known to us the good and the useful. Consider these. The
   good (to kalon) belongs to the panegyrical form of speech, the useful
   to the persuasive. For the hortatory and the dehortatory are a form of
   the persuasive, and the laudatory and inculpatory of the panegyrical.

   For the persuasive style of sentence in one form becomes hortatory, and
   in another dehortatory. So also the panegyrical in one form becomes
   inculpatory, and in another laudatory. And in these exercises the
   Instructor, the Just One, who has proposed our advantage as His aim, is
   chiefly occupied. But the inculpatory and dehortatory forms of speech
   have been already shown us; and we must now handle the persuasive and
   the laudatory, and, as on a beam, balance the equal scales of justice.
   The exhortation to what is useful, the Instructor employs by Solomon,
   to the following effect: "I exhort you, O men; and I utter my voice to
   the sons of men. Hear me; for I will speak of excellent things;" [1268]
   and so on. And He counsels what is salutary: for counsel has for its
   end, choosing or refusing a certain course; as He does by David, when
   He says, "Blessed is the man who walketh not in the counsels of the
   ungodly, and standeth not in the way of sinners, and sitteth not in the
   chair of pestilences; but his will is in the law of the Lord." [1269]
   And there are three departments of counsel: That which takes examples
   from past times; as what the Hebrews suffered when they worshipped the
   golden calf, and what they suffered when they committed fornication,
   and the like. The second, whose meaning is understood from the present
   times, as being apprehended by perception; as it was said to those who
   asked the Lord, "If He was the Christ, or shall we wait for another? Go
   and tell John, the blind receive their sight, the deaf hear, the lepers
   are cleansed, the dead are raised up; and blessed is he who shall not
   be offended in Me." [1270] Such was that which David said when he
   prophesied, "As we have heard, so have we seen." [1271] And the third
   department of counsel consists of what is future, by which we are
   bidden guard against what is to happen; as also that was said, "They
   that fall into sins shall be cast into outer darkness, where there
   shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth," [1272] and the like. So that
   from these things it is clear that the Lord, going the round of all the
   methods of curative treatment, calls humanity to salvation.

   By encouragement He assuages sins, reducing lust, and at the same time
   inspiring hope for salvation. For He says by Ezekiel, "If ye return
   with your whole heart, and say, Father, I will hear you, as a holy
   people." [1273] And again He says, "Come all to Me, who labour, and are
   heavy laden, and I will give you rest;" [1274] and that which is added
   the Lord speaks in His own person. And very clearly He calls to
   goodness by Solomon, when He says, "Blessed is the man who hath found
   wisdom, and the mortal who hath found understanding." [1275] "For the
   good is found by him who seeks it, and is wont to be seen by him who
   has found it." [1276] By Jeremiah, too, He sets forth prudence, when he
   says, "Blessed are we, Israel; for what is pleasing to God is known by
   us; [1277] --and it is known by the Word, by whom we are blessed and
   wise. For wisdom and knowledge are mentioned by the same prophet, when
   he says, "Hear, O Israel, the commandments of life, and give ear to
   know understanding." [1278] By Moses, too, by reason of the love He has
   to man, He promises a gift to those who hasten to salvation. For He
   says, "And I will bring you into the good land, which the Lord sware to
   your fathers." [1279] And further, "And I will bring you into the holy
   mountain, and make you glad," [1280] He says by Isaiah. And still
   another form of instruction is benediction. "And blessed is he," He
   saith by David, "who has not sinned; and he shall be as the tree
   planted near the channels of the waters, which will yield its fruit in
   its season, and his leaf shall not wither" [1281] (by this He made an
   allusion to the resurrection); "and whatsoever he shall do shall
   prosper with him." Such He wishes us to be, that we may be blessed.
   Again, showing the opposite scale of the balance of justice, He says,
   "But not so the ungodly--not so; but as the dust which the wind sweeps
   away from the face of the earth." [1282] By showing the punishment of
   sinners, and their easy dispersion, and carrying off by the wind, the
   Instructor dissuades from crime by means of punishment; and by holding
   up the merited penalty, shows the benignity of His beneficence in the
   most skilful way, in order that we may possess and enjoy its blessings.
   He invites us to knowledge also, when He says by Jeremiah, "Hadst thou
   walked in the way of God, thou wouldst have dwelt for ever in peace;"
   [1283] for, exhibiting there the reward of knowledge, He calls the wise
   to the love of it. And, granting pardon to him who has erred, He says,
   "Turn, turn, as a grape-gatherer to his basket." [1284] Do you see the
   goodness of justice, in that it counsels to repentance? And still
   further, by Jeremiah, He enlightens in the truth those who have erred.
   "Thus saith the Lord, Stand in the ways, and look, and ask for the
   eternal paths of the Lord, what is the good path, and walk in it, and
   ye shall find purification for your souls." [1285] And in order to
   promote our salvation, He leads us to repentance. Wherefore He says,
   "If thou repent, the Lord will purify thy heart, and the heart of thy
   seed." [1286] We might have adduced, as supporters on this question,
   the philosophers who say that only the perfect man is worthy of praise,
   and the bad man of blame. But since some slander beatitude, as neither
   itself taking any trouble, nor giving any to any one else, thus not
   understanding its love to man; on their account, and on account of
   those who do not associate justice with goodness, the following remarks
   are added. For it were a legitimate inference to say, that rebuke and
   censure are suitable to men, since they say that all men are bad; but
   God alone is wise, from whom cometh wisdom, and alone perfect, and
   therefore alone worthy of praise. But I do not employ such language. I
   say, then, that praise or blame, or whatever resembles praise or blame,
   are medicines most essential of all to men. Some are ill to cure, and,
   like iron, are wrought into shape with fire, and hammer, and anvil,
   that is, with threatening, and reproof, and chastisement; while others,
   cleaving to faith itself, as self-taught, and as acting of their own
   free-will, grow by praise:--


   "For virtue that is praised

   Grows like a tree."

   And comprehending this, as it seems to me, the Samian Pythagoras gives
   the injunction:--


   "When you have done base things, rebuke yourself;

   But when you have done good things, be glad."

   Chiding is also called admonishing; and the etymology of admonishing
   (nouthetesis) is (nou enthematismos) putting of understanding into one;
   so that rebuking is bringing one to one's senses.

   But there are myriads of injunctions to be found, whose aim is the
   attainment of what is good, and the avoidance of what is evil. "For
   there is no peace to the wicked, saith the Lord." [1287] Wherefore by
   Solomon He commands the children to beware: "My son, let not sinners
   deceive thee, and go not after their ways; and go not, if they entice
   thee, saying, Come with us, share with us in innocent blood, and let us
   hide unjustly the righteous man in the earth; let us put him out of
   sight, all alive as he is into Hades." [1288] This is accordingly
   likewise a prediction concerning the Lord's passion. And by Ezekiel,
   the life supplies commandments: "The soul that sinneth shall die; but
   he that doeth righteousness shall be righteous. He eateth not upon the
   mountains, and hath not set his eyes on the devices of the house of
   Israel, and will not defile his neighbour's wife, and will not approach
   to a woman in her separation, and will not oppress a man, and will
   restore the debtor's pledge, and will not take plunder: he will give
   his bread to the hungry, and clothe the naked. His money he will not
   give on usury, and will not take interest; and he will turn away his
   hand from wrong, and will execute righteous judgment between a man and
   his neighbour. He has walked in my statutes, and kept my judgments to
   do them. This is a righteous man. He shall surely live, saith the
   Lord." [1289] These words contain a description of the conduct of
   Christians, a notable exhortation to the blessed life, which is the
   reward of a life of goodness--everlasting life.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1268] Prov. viii. 4, 6.

   [1269] Ps. i. 1, 2.

   [1270] Matt. xi. 3-6; Luke vii. 19, 22, 23.

   [1271] Ps. xlviii. 8.

   [1272] Matt. xxii. 13, xxv. 30.

   [1273] Ezek. xviii., xxxiii.

   [1274] Matt. xi. 28.

   [1275] Prov. iii. 13.

   [1276] In Prov. ii. 4, 5, iii. 15, Jer. ii. 24, we have the sense of
   these verses.

   [1277] Baruch iv. 4.

   [1278] Baruch iii. 9.

   [1279] Deut xxxi. 20.

   [1280] Isa. lvi. 7.

   [1281] Ps. i. 1-3.

   [1282] Ps. i. 4.

   [1283] Baruch iii. 13.

   [1284] Jer. vi. 9.

   [1285] Jer. vi. 16.

   [1286] Deut. xxx. 6.

   [1287] Isa. lvii. 21, xlviii. 22.

   [1288] Prov. i. 10-12.

   [1289] Ezek. xviii. 4-9.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter XI.--That the Word Instructed by the Law and the Prophets.

   The mode of His love and His instruction we have shown as we could.
   Wherefore He Himself, declaring Himself very beautifully, likened
   Himself to a grain of mustard-seed; [1290] and pointed out the
   spirituality of the word that is sown, and the productiveness of its
   nature, and the magnificence and conspicuousness of the power of the
   word; and besides, intimated that the pungency and the purifying virtue
   of punishment are profitable on account of its sharpness. By the little
   grain, as it is figuratively called, He bestows salvation on all
   humanity abundantly. Honey, being very sweet, generates bile, as
   goodness begets contempt, which is the cause of sinning. But mustard
   lessens bile, that is, anger, and stops inflammation, that is, pride.
   From which Word springs the true health of the soul, and its eternal
   happy temperament (eukrasia).

   Accordingly, of old He instructed by Moses, and then by the prophets.
   Moses, too, was a prophet. For the law is the training of refractory
   children. "Having feasted to the full," accordingly, it is said, "they
   rose up to play;" [1291] senseless repletion with victuals being called
   chortasma (fodder), not broma (food). And when, having senselessly
   filled themselves, they senselessly played; on that account the law was
   given them, and terror ensued for the prevention of transgressions and
   for the promotion of right actions, securing attention, and so winning
   to obedience to the true Instructor, being one and the same Word, and
   reducing to conformity with the urgent demands of the law. For Paul
   says that it was given to be a "schoolmaster to bring us to Christ."
   [1292] So that from this it is clear, that one alone, true, good, just,
   in the image and likeness of the Father, His Son Jesus, the Word of
   God, is our Instructor; to whom God hath entrusted us, as an
   affectionate father commits his children to a worthy tutor, expressly
   charging us, "This is my beloved Son: hear Him." [1293] The divine
   Instructor is trustworthy, adorned as He is with three of the fairest
   ornament"--knowledge, benevolence, and authority of utterance;--with
   knowledge, for He is the paternal wisdom: "All Wisdom is from the Lord,
   and with Him for evermore;"--with authority of utterance, for He is God
   and Creator: "For all things were made by Him, and without Him was not
   anything made;" [1294] --and with benevolence, for He alone gave
   Himself a sacrifice for us: "For the good Shepherd giveth His life for
   the sheep;" [1295] and He has so given it. Now, benevolence is nothing
   but wishing to do good to one's neighbour for his sake.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1290] Matt. xiii. 31; Luke xiii. 19.

   [1291] Ex. xxxii. 6; 1 Cor. x. 7.

   [1292] Gal. iii. 24.

   [1293] Matt. xvii. 5.

   [1294] John i. 3.

   [1295] John x. 11.
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter XII.--The Instructor Characterized by the Severity and Benignity
      of Paternal Affection.

   Having now accomplished those things, it were a fitting sequel that our
   instructor Jesus should draw for us the model of the true life, and
   train humanity in Christ.

   Nor is the cast and character of the life He enjoins very formidable;
   nor is it made altogether easy by reason of His benignity. He enjoins
   His commands, and at the same time gives them such a character that
   they may be accomplished.

   The view I take is, that He Himself formed man of the dust, and
   regenerated him by water; and made him grow by his Spirit; and trained
   him by His word to adoption and salvation, directing him by sacred
   precepts; in order that, transforming earth-born man into a holy and
   heavenly being by His advent, He might fulfil to the utmost that divine
   utterance, "Let Us make man in Our own image and likeness." [1296] And,
   in truth, Christ became the perfect realization of what God spake; and
   the rest of humanity is conceived as being created merely in His image.

   But let us, O children of the good Father--nurslings of the good
   Instructor--fulfil the Father's will, listen to the Word, and take on
   the impress of the truly saving life of our Saviour; and meditating on
   the heavenly mode of life according to which we have been deified, let
   us anoint ourselves with the perennial immortal bloom of gladness--that
   ointment of sweet fragrance--having a clear example of immortality in
   the walk and conversation of the Lord; and following the footsteps of
   God, to whom alone it belongs to consider, and whose care it is to see
   to, the way and manner in which the life of men may be made more
   healthy. Besides, He makes preparation for a self-sufficing mode of
   life, for simplicity, and for girding up our loins, and for free and
   unimpeded readiness of our journey; in order to the attainment of an
   eternity of beatitude, teaching each one of us to be his own
   storehouse. For He says, "Take no anxious thought for to-morrow,"
   [1297] meaning that the man who has devoted himself to Christ ought to
   be sufficient to himself, and servant to himself, and moreover lead a
   life which provides for each day by itself. For it is not in war, but
   in peace, that we are trained. War needs great preparation, and luxury
   craves profusion; but peace and love, simple and quiet sisters, require
   no arms nor excessive preparation. The Word is their sustenance.

   Our superintendence in instruction and discipline is the office of the
   Word, from whom we learn frugality and humility, and all that pertains
   to love of truth, love of man, and love of excellence. And so, in a
   word, being assimilated to God by a participation in moral excellence,
   we must not retrograde into carelessness and sloth. But labour, and
   faint not. Thou shalt be what thou dost not hope, and canst not
   conjecture. And as there is one mode of training for philosophers,
   another for orators, and another for athletes; so is there a generous
   disposition, suitable to the choice that is set upon moral loveliness,
   resulting from the training of Christ. And in the case of those who
   have been trained according to this influence, their gait in walking,
   their sitting at table, their food, their sleep, their going to bed,
   their regimen, and the rest of their mode of life, acquire a superior
   dignity. [1298] For such a training as is pursued by the Word is not
   overstrained, but is of the right tension. Thus, therefore, the Word
   has been called also the Saviour, seeing He has found out for men those
   rational medicines which produce vigour of the senses and salvation;
   and devotes Himself to watching for the favourable moment, reproving
   evil, exposing the causes of evil affections, and striking at the roots
   of irrational lusts, pointing out what we ought to abstain from, and
   supplying all the antidotes of salvation to those who are diseased. For
   the greatest and most regal work of God is the salvation of humanity.
   The sick are vexed at a physician, who gives no advice bearing on their
   restoration to health. But how shall we not acknowledge the highest
   gratitude to the divine Instructor, who is not silent, who omits not
   those threatenings that point towards destruction, but discloses them,
   and cuts off the impulses that tend to them; and who indoctrinates in
   those counsels which result in the true way of living? We must confess,
   therefore, the deepest obligations to Him. For what else do we say is
   incumbent on the rational creature--I mean man--than the contemplation
   of the Divine? I say, too, that it is requisite to contemplate human
   nature, and to live as the truth directs, and to admire the Instructor
   and His injunctions, as suitable and harmonious to each other.
   According to which image also we ought, conforming ourselves to the
   Instructor, and making the word and our deeds agree, to live a real
   life.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1296] Gen. i. 26.

   [1297] Matt. vi. 34.

   [1298] [The secondary, civilizing, and socializing power of the Gospel,
   must have already produced all this change from heathen manners, under
   Clement's own observation.]
     __________________________________________________________________

      Chapter XIII.--Virtue Rational, Sin Irrational.

   Everything that is contrary to right reason is sin. Accordingly,
   therefore, the philosophers think fit to define the most generic
   passions thus: lust, as desire disobedient to reason; fear, as weakness
   disobedient to reason; pleasure, as an elation of the spirit
   disobedient to reason. If, then, disobedience in reference to reason is
   the generating cause of sin, how shall we escape the conclusion, that
   obedience to reason--the Word--which we call faith, will of necessity
   be the efficacious cause of duty? For virtue itself is a state of the
   soul rendered harmonious by reason in respect to the whole life. Nay,
   to crown all, philosophy itself is pronounced to be the cultivation of
   right reason; so that, necessarily, whatever is done through error of
   reason is transgression, and is rightly called, (hamartema) sin. Since,
   then, the first man sinned and disobeyed God, it is said, "And man
   became like to the beasts:" [1299] being rightly regarded as
   irrational, he is likened to the beasts. Whence Wisdom says: "The horse
   for covering; the libidinous and the adulterer is become like to an
   irrational beast." [1300] Wherefore also it is added: "He neighs,
   whoever may be sitting on him." The man, it is meant, no longer speaks;
   for he who transgresses against reason is no longer rational, but an
   irrational animal, given up to lusts by which he is ridden (as a horse
   by his rider).

   But that which is done right, in obedience to reason, the followers of
   the Stoics call prosekon and kathekon, that is, incumbent and fitting.
   What is fitting is incumbent. And obedience is founded on commands. And
   these being, as they are, the same as counsel--having truth for their
   aim, train up to the ultimate goal of aspiration, which is conceived of
   as the end (telos). And the end of piety is eternal rest in God. And
   the beginning of eternity is our end. The right operation of piety
   perfects duty by works; whence, according to just reasoning, duties
   consist in actions, not in sayings. And Christian conduct is the
   operation of the rational soul in accordance with a correct judgment
   and aspiration after the truth, which attains its destined end through
   the body, the soul's consort and ally. [1301] Virtue is a will in
   conformity to God and Christ in life, rightly adjusted to life
   everlasting. For the life of Christians, in which we are now trained,
   is a system of reasonable actions--that is, of those things taught by
   the Word--an unfailing energy which we have called faith. The system is
   the commandments of the Lord, which, being divine statutes and
   spiritual counsels, have been written for ourselves, being adapted for
   ourselves and our neighbours. Moreover, they turn back on us, as the
   ball rebounds on him that throws it by the repercussion. Whence also
   duties are essential for divine discipline, as being enjoined by God,
   and furnished for our salvation. And since, of those things which are
   necessary, some relate only to life here, and others, which relate to
   the blessed life yonder, wing us for flight hence; so, in an analogous
   manner, of duties, some are ordained with reference to life, others for
   the blessed life. The commandments issued with respect to natural life
   are published to the multitude; but those that are suited for living
   well, and from which eternal life springs, we have to consider, as in a
   sketch, as we read them out of the Scriptures.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1299] Ps. xlix. 12, 20.

   [1300] Ecclus. xxxiii. 6.

   [1301] [Note this definition in Christian ethics.]
     __________________________________________________________________
     __________________________________________________________________
